
This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but what a train of ideas it started in my mind! Here were new treasuries of data on the Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had strange interests at sea as well as on land.  Wilcox was a precocious youth of known genius but great eccentricity, and had from childhood excited attention through the strange stories and odd dreams he was in the habit of relating.  Collins and First Mate Green, were killed; and the remaining eight under

Second Mate Johansen proceeded to navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in their original direction to see if any reas- on for their ordering back had existed.  This man, Joseph D.  I did not forget the mixed blood and marine pursuits of the cult-members in Louisiana, and would not be surprised to learn of secret methods and rites and beliefs.  There was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the chronicler could not put on paper.  There was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as the steam mounted higher and higher the brave

Norwegian drove his vessel head on against the pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the stern of a daemon galleon.  They knew all that was occurring in the universe, for Their mode of speech was transmitted thought.  Young Wilcox's rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enough to make him recall and record it verbatim, was of a fantastically poetic cast which must have typified his whole conversation, and which I have since found highly characteristic of him.  His temperature, oddly enough, was not greatly above normal; but the whole condition was otherwise such as to suggest true fever rather than mental disorder.  Behind the figure was a vague suggestions of a Cyclopean architectural background.  There had been aeons when other Things ruled on the earth, and They had had great cities. "
- Algernon Blackwood
The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents.  There had been a slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most considerable felt in New England for some years; and Wilcox's imagination had been keenly af- fected.  Each would have fled had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it was only half-heartedly that they searched - vainly, as it proved - for some portable souvenir to bear away.  con- sciousness was manifested, perhaps, in shapes and forms long since withdrawn before the tide of advancing humanity. 
Three men were swept up by the flabby claws before any- body turned.  For five minutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description.  Parker slipped as the other three were plunging frenziedly over end- less vistas of green-crusted rock to the boat, and Johansen swears he was swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldn't have been there; an angle which was acute, but be- haved as if it were obtuse.  Old Castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some years.  For an instant the ship was befouled by an acrid and blinding green cloud, and then there was only a venomous seething astern; where - God in heaven! - the scattered plasticity of that nameless sky-spawn was nebulously recombining in its hateful original form, whilst its distance widened every second as the Alert gained impetus from its mounting steam.  A dispatch from California describes a theosophist colony as donning white robes en masse for some "glorious fulfillment" which never arrives, whilst items from In- dia speak guardedly of serious native unrest toward the end of March 22-23.  The crouching image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly wings, and hieroglyphed pedestal, was preserved in the

Museum at Hyde Park; and I studied it long and well, finding it a thing of balefully exquisite workmanship, and with the same utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly strangeness of material which I had noted in Legrasse's smaller specimen.  When I think of the extent of all that may be brooding down there I almost wish to kill my- self forthwith.  Geologists, the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they vowed that the world held no rock like it.  It was the Sydney Bulletin I have mentioned, for my friend had wide affiliations in all con- ceivable foreign parts; and the picture was a half-tone cut of a hideous stone image almost identical with that which Legrasse had found in the swamp. 
Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result.  Hi- eroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and from some undetermined point below had come a voice that was not a voice; a chaotic sensation which only fancy could transmute in- to sound, but which he attempted to render by the almost un- pronounceable jumble of letters: "Cthulhu fhtagn. 
In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of per- haps an acre's extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. A. 
The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the entire meeting, was a commonplace-looking middle-aged man who had traveled all the way from New Or- leans for certain special information unobtainable from any loc- al source.  My uncle, it seems, had quickly instituted a prodigiously far-flung body of inquires amongst nearly all the friends whom he could question without impertinence, asking for nightly reports of their dreams, and the dates of any notable visions for some time past.  As it was, lacking their original letters, I half suspected the compiler of having asked leading questions, or of having edited the correspondence in corrobor- ation of what he had latently resolved to see.  And writ- ing of some kind the bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be; though my memory, despite much the papers and collec- tions of my uncle, failed in any way to identify this particular species, or even hint at its remotest affiliations.  That he really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncle's relentless catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again I strove to think of some way in which he could possibly have received the weird impressions. 
Steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of all hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of feverish rushing up and down between wheel and engines to get the Alert under way.  But it is not from them that there came the single glimpse of for- bidden eons which chills me when I think of it and maddens me when I dream of it. 
The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse's tale, corroborated as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent correspondence of those who attended; although scant mention occurs in the formal publications of the society.  He must have been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else the world would by now be screaming with fright and frenzy.  Tobey, whom he learned to be in charge.  In less than a month I was in Dunedin; where, however, I found that little was known of the strange cult-members who had lingered in the old sea-taverns.  Remains of Them, he said the deathless Chinamen had told him, were still be found as Cyclopean stones on islands in the Pacific.  Might not the deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptor's data have come to sinis- ter ears? I think Professor Angell died because he knew too much, or because he was likely to learn too much.  Johansen's address, I discovered, lay in the Old Town of King Harold Haardrada, which kept alive the name of Oslo during all the centuries that the greater city masqueraded as "Christiana.  It had escaped even the cutting bureau which had at the time of its issuance been avidly col- lecting material for my uncle's research.  Castro, apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly secret. 
He had not long survived his return, said his wife, for the do- ings at sea in 1925 had broken him.  Wilcox, I was sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon forgotten it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining.  It appears that on March 1st, 1925, a thin, dark young man of neurotic and excited aspect had called upon Professor Angell bearing the singular clay bas-relief, which was then ex- ceedingly damp and fresh.  Of his stirring experience he would tell his friends no more than he had told the admiralty officials, and all they could do was to give me his Oslo address.  The squatters there, mostly primitive but good- natured descendants of Lafitte's men, were in the grip of stark terror from an unknown thing which had stolen upon them in the night.  A. 
But Johansen had not given out yet.  All of these, however, bore out the notes in full.  Then, very softly and slowly, the acre-great lintel began to give in- ward at the top; and they saw that it was balanced.  Professor Angell was widely known as an authority on ancient inscriptions, and had frequently been resorted to by the heads of prominent museums; so that his passing at the age of ninety-two may be recalled by many.  We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far. . M.  Four of them reeled, one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened.  I.  But before many questions were asked, it became manifest that something far deeper and older than Negro fetishism was in- volved.  It

was, no doubt, the giant shape he had raved of in delirium.  The cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers brushed the backs of huge fore paws which clasped the croucher's elevated knees. 
Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around tall idols which the Great Ones showed them; idols brought in dim eras from dark stars.  At the end of the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed on in silence through the ter- rible cypress woods where day never came.  But I was then convinced that young Wilcox had known of the older matters mentioned by the professor.  The authorities at Tulane University could shed no light upon either cult or image, and now the detective had come to the highest authorities in the country and met with no more than the Greenland tale of Professor Webb. , New Orleans, La.  Examining one day the reserve specimens roughly set on the storage shelves in a rear room of the mu- seum, my eye was caught by an odd picture in one of the old papers spread beneath the stones.  Briden's death re- veals no apparent cause, and was probably due to excitement or exposure. .  This text, as given, ran something like this:
"In his house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.  But memory never died, and the high- priests said that the city would rise again when the stars were right. 
Three of the Emma's men, including Capt.  They included not only a repetition of what he had formerly dreamed, but touched wildly on a gigantic thing "miles high" which walked or lumbered about.  One sight of the thing had been enough to throw the assembled men of science into a state of tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowding around him to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangeness and air of genuinely abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at un- opened and archaic vistas.  One Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. .  It was inside this circle that the ring of worshippers jumped and roared, the gen- eral direction of the mass motion being from left to right in endless Bacchanal between the ring of bodies and the ring of fire.  I did not en- large his knowledge in this regard, but sought with some sub- tlety to draw him out. 
And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed defeat at the Inspector's problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch of bizarre famili- arity in the monstrous shape and writing, and who presently told with some diffidence of the odd trifle he knew.  Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at the terrible reality. 
Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even though he saw the city and the Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly again when I think of the horrors that lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space, and of those unhallowed blasphemies from elder stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favoured by a nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them upon the world whenever another earthquake shall heave their mon- strous stone city again to the sun and air. 
In the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed Old Ones in dreams, but then something happened.  The very sun of heaven seemed distorted when viewed through the polarising miasma welling out from this sea-soaked perversion, and twisted menace and suspense lurked leeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where a second glance showed concavity after the first showed convexity. 
As my great-uncle's heir and executor, for he died a childless widower, I was expected to go over his papers with some thor- oughness; and for that purpose moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters in Boston.  They were Donovan, Guerrera, and Angstrom.  Caution is the first care of those accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and imposture.  It is well that no explanation shall ever reach them. 
It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came, and I know that panic would have broken loose had they been able to compare notes. 
Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the item in detail; and was disappointed to find it of only mod- erate length. 
Something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything more definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen.  Much of the material which I correlated will be later published by the American Ar- chaeological Society, but there was one box which I found ex- ceedingly puzzling, and which I felt much averse from showing to other eyes.  I have often wondered if all the ob- jects of the professor's questioning felt as puzzled as did this fraction.  Our Auckland correspondent gives the Emma and her crew an excellent reputation, and Johansen is described as a sober and worthy man.  It was nightmare itself, and to see it was to die.  The carven idol was great Cthulhu, but none might say whether or not the others were precisely like him.  There lay great Cthulhu and his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults and sending out at last, after cycles incalculable, the thoughts that spread fear to the dreams of the sensitive and called im- periously to the faithful to come on a pilgrimage of liberation and restoration.  But of those mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained.  Reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refused point-blank to advance another inch toward the scene of un- holy worship, so Inspector Legrasse and his nineteen col- leagues plunged on unguided into black arcades of horror that none of them had ever trod before. 
Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but references to certain of the scattered notes gave me much material for thought - so much, in fact, that only the ingrained skepticism then forming my philosophy can account for my continued dis- trust of the artist. 
These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed altogether of flesh and blood.  I saw the Alert, now sold and in commercial use, at Circular Quay in Sydney Cove, but gained nothing from its non-committal bulk. .  No one could read the old writing now, but things were told by word of mouth.  He would write of what he knew before death came, but his wife must not guess.  On the contrary, his wish for en- lightenment was prompted by purely professional considera- tions.  Legrasse dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all stood trembling and nearly hypnotised with horror.  So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, and pulled desperately for the Alert as the mountainous monstrosity flopped down the slimy stones and hesitated, floundering at the edge of the water. .  It must not be fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least interest in archaeology.  I have looked upon all that the uni- verse has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me.  Legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but in Norway a certain seaman who saw things is dead. 
The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and careful study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exquisitely artistic workmanship.  The charac- ters along the base were equally baffling; and no member present, despite a representation of half the world's expert learning in this field, could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistic kinship.  And so far

as he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features of the bestial thing now lying before the meeting.  It savoured of the wildest dreams of myth-maker and theosophist, and disclosed an astonishing degree of cosmic imagination among such half- castes and pariahs as might be least expected to possess it.  Reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the young man's subsidence into lethargy.  The reception of his request seems to have varied; but he must, at the very least, have received more responses

than any ordinary man could have handled without a secretary.  The Emma, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her course by the great storm of March 1st, and on March 22nd, in S. 
The region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil repute, substantially unknown and untraversed by white men.  My uncle at once telephoned the family, and from that time forward kept close watch of the case; calling often at the Thayer Street office of Dr.  When, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the Great Old Ones spoke to the sensitive among them by moulding their dreams; for only thus could Their lan- guage reach the fleshly minds of mammals.  Wild blows were struck, shots were fired, and escapes were made; but in the end Legrasse was able to count some forty-seven sullen prisoners, whom he forced to dress in haste and fall into line between two rows of policemen.  They said it had been there before D'Iberville, before La Salle, before the Indians, and before even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods.  God! What wonder that across the earth a great ar- chitect went mad, and poor Wilcox raved with fever in that telepathic instant? The Thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to claim his own.  The youth's febrile mind, apparently, was dwelling on strange things; and the doctor shuddered now and then as he spoke of them.  The notes in question were those descriptive of the dreams of various persons covering the same period as that in which young Wilcox had had his strange visitations.  All denied a part in the ritual murders, and averred that the killing had been done by Black Winged Ones which had come to them from their immemorial meeting-place in the haunted wood.  The living man was clutching a horrible stone idol of un- known origin, about foot in height, regarding whose nature au- thorities at Sydney University, the Royal Society, and the Mu- seum in College Street all profess complete bafflement, and which the survivor says he found in the cabin of the yacht, in a small carved shrine of common pattern.  Then came out of the earth the black spirits of earth, mouldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumours picked up in

caverns beneath forgotten sea-bottoms. 
Above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evident pictorial intent, though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea of its nature.  But these were not the Great Old Ones. "
Shaken with such a mental resolution as I had never before known, I now resolved to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo.  Physicians found no adequate cause the end, and laid it to heart trouble and a weakened constitution.  Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for the soapy, greenish-black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations re- sembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy.  He said, "It is new, indeed, for I made it last night in a dream of strange cities; and dreams are older than brooding Tyre, or the con- templative Sphinx, or garden-girdled Babylon.  Johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping Babylon of elder daemons, and must have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this or of any sane planet.  It is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakably akin to the dream-sculpture of young Wilcox.  They, like the subject and material, belonged to something horribly remote and distinct from man- kind as we know it, something frightfully suggestive of old and unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our concep- tions have no part.  At length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove in sight; and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group of bobbing lanterns. 
On November 1st, 1907, there had come to the New Orleans police a frantic summons from the swamp and lagoon country to the south.  As Wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was all wrong. 

The Morrison Co.  It had been locked and I did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine the personal ring which the pro- fessor carried in his pocket.  Degraded and ignorant as they were, the creatures held with surprising consistency to the central idea of their loathsome faith.  The time would be easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the Great Old Ones; free and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and morals thrown aside and all men shouting and killing and reveling in joy.  The muffled beat of tom- toms was now faintly audible far, far ahead; and a curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the wind shifted. 
The aperture was black with a darkness almost material. "
On March 23, the manuscript continued, Wilcox failed to ap- pear; and inquiries at his quarters revealed that he had been stricken with an obscure sort of fever and taken to the home of his family in Waterman Street.  This person was the late William Channing Webb, Professor of Anthropo- logy in Princeton University, and an explorer of no slight note.  After vigintillions of years great Cthulhu was loose again, and raven- ing for delight.  The great stone city R'lyeh, with its monoliths and sepulchers, had sunk beneath the waves; and the deep waters, full of the one primal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut off the spectral intercourse.  Profess- or Angell must have employed a cutting bureau, for the num- ber of extracts was tremendous, and the sources scattered throughout the globe.  After that Johansen only brooded over the idol in the cabin and attended to a few matters of food for himself and the laughing maniac by his side.  He called himself "psychically hyper- sensitive", but the staid folk of the ancient commercial city dis- missed him as merely "queer.  Then I told him who I was, he displayed some interest; for my uncle had excited his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet had never explained the reason for the study. 
It may have been only imagination and it may have been only echoes which induced one of the men, an excitable Spaniard, to fancy he heard antiphonal responses to the ritual from some

far and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient le- gendry and horror.  The Emma's men showed fight, says the survivor, and though the schooner began to sink from shots beneath the water-line they managed to heave alongside their enemy and board her, grappling with the savage crew on the yacht's deck, and being forced to kill them all, the number being slightly su- perior, because of their particularly abhorrent and desperate though rather clumsy mode of fighting.  But it made men dream, and so they knew enough to keep away.  In this phantasy of prismatic distortion it moved anomalously in a di- agonal way, so that all the rules of matter and perspective seemed upset.  They and their subconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he shewed me a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake with the potency of its black suggestion.  This was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed and always would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the world until the time when the great priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the

mighty city of R'lyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again beneath his sway.  There then followed an ex- haustive comparison of details, and a moment of really awed si- lence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual identity of the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds of distance apart.  A weird bunch of cuttings, all told; and I can at this date scarcely envisage the callous rationalism with which I set them aside.  The professor had been stricken whilst returning from the Newport boat; falling suddenly; as witnesses said, after having been jostled by a nautical-looking negro who had come from one of the queer dark courts on the precipitous hill- side which formed a short cut from the waterfront to the deceased's home in Williams Street.  Webb's Acct. Z. 
So a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an auto- mobile, had set out in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide. 
Poor Johansen's handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this.  The size of the Old Ones, too, he curiously declined to mention.  Pronounced well by his physician, he returned to his quarters in three days; but to Professor Angell he was of no further assistance.  They have hinted at strange survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if not masked by a bland optimism.  It was, the professor stated, a very crude bas-relief of stone, com- prising a hideous picture and some cryptic writing. 

Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by Legrasse's men as they ploughed on through the black mor- ass toward the red glare and muffled tom-toms.  The stars were right again, and what an age-old cult had failed to do by design, a band of innocent sailors had done by accident. 
The west of Ireland, too, is full of wild rumour and legendry, and a fantastic painter named Ardois-Bonnot hangs a blas- phemous Dream Landscape in the Paris spring salon of 1926.  He said that the geo- metry of the dream-place he saw was abnormal, non-Euclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from ours.  From a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at regular intervals with the flame-girt monolith as a centre hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters who had disappeared.  They all died vast epochs of time before men came, but there were arts which could revive Them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in the cycle of eternity.  Meanwhile the cult, by appropriate rites, must keep alive the memory of those ancient ways and shadow forth the prophecy of their return.  He is Gustaf Johansen, a Norwegian of some intelligence, and had been second mate of the two-masted schooner Emma of Auckland, which sailed for Callao February 20th with a complement of eleven men.  Scientific men were little more affected, though four cases of vague de- scription suggest fugitive glimpses of strange landscapes, and in one case there is mentioned a dread of something abnormal. "
And now, in response to a general and urgent demand, In- spector Legrasse related as fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshippers; telling a story to which I could see my uncle attached profound significance. . .  Of the swarthy cult-fiends on the Alert he speaks with significant horror. , which was sighted April 12th in S.  It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more ter- rible sort than they had ever known; and some of their women and children had disappeared since the malevolent tom-tom had begun its incessant beating far within the black haunted woods where no dweller ventured. 
One thing I began to suspect, and which I now fear I know, is that my uncle's death was far from natural.  Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that was not of earth the titan Thing from the stars slavered and gibbered like Polypheme cursing the fleeing ship of Odysseus.  One could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the relative position of everything else seemed phantasmally variable.  S. 
It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith and shouted of what he had found.  Then the liberated Old Ones would teach them new ways to shout and kill and revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame with a holocaust of ecstasy and freedom.  What I now heard so graphically at first- hand, though it was really no more than a detailed confirma- tion of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh; for I felt sure that I was on the track of a very real, very secret, and very ancient religion whose discovery would make me an an- thropologist of note.  It was a faith of which other Esquimaux knew little, and which they mentioned only with shudders, say- ing that it had come down from horribly ancient aeons before ever the world was made.  Once before, it appears, Professor Angell had seen the hellish outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the ominous syllables which can be rendered only as "Cthulhu"; and all this in so stirring and horrible a connection that it is small wonder he pursued young Wilcox with queries and demands for data.  Then, bolder than the storied Cyclops, great Cthulhu slid greasily into the water and began to pursue with vast wave-raising strokes of cosmic potency.  One case, which the note describes with emphasis, was very sad.  I hope that no one else will accomplish this piecing out; certainly, if I live, I shall never knowingly supply a link in so hideous a chain. 
That was all. 
Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration.  It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form which only a dis- eased fancy could conceive.  On April 12th the derelict was sighted; and though apparently deserted, was found upon boarding to contain one survivor in a half-delirious condition and one man who had evidently been dead for more than a week. "
Then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, came suddenly in sight of the spectacle itself.  He questioned the sculptor with scientific minuteness; and studied with frantic in- tensity the bas-relief on which the youth had found himself working, chilled and clad only in his night clothes, when wak- ing had stolen bewilderingly over him.  That cult would never die till the stars came right again, and the secret priests would take great Cthulhu from His tomb to revive His subjects and resume His rule of earth. 
This earlier experience had come in 1908, seventeen years before, when the American Archaeological Society held its an- nual meeting in St. 
The first half of the principal manuscript told a very particu- lar tale.  Who knows the end? What has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise.  What the police did extract, came mainly from the immensely aged mestizo named Castro, who claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying leaders of the cult in the mountains of China.  Professor Webb had been engaged, forty-eight years before, in a tour of Greenland and Iceland in search of some Runic in- scriptions which he failed to unearth; and whilst high up on the West Greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of degenerate Esquimaux whose religion, a curious form of devil-worship, chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. 
On April 2 at about 3 P.  The rest fol- lowed him, and looked curiously at the immense carved door with the now familiar squid-dragon bas-relief.  Latitude 49°51' W.  I cannot attempt to transcribe it verbatim in all its

cloudiness and redundance, but I will tell its gist enough to show why the sound the water against the vessel's sides be- came so unendurable to me that I stopped my ears with cotton.  Professor Angell, as befitted one of his authority and attainments, had had a prominent part in all the deliberations; and was one of the first to be approached by the several outsiders who took advantage of the convocation to offer questions for correct answering and problems for expert solution.  My attitude was still one of absolute ma- terialism, as I wish it still were, and I discounted with almost inexplicable perversity the coincidence of the dream notes and odd cuttings collected by Professor Angell. " Never mingling much with his kind, he had dropped gradually from social visibility, and was now known only to a small group of aesthetes from other towns. "
These words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of dead Cthulhu's dream-vigil in his stone vault at R'lyeh, and I felt deeply moved despite my rational beliefs.  The subject, a widely known architect with leanings toward theosophy and occultism, went violently insane on the date of young Wilcox's seizure, and expired several months later after incessant screamings to be saved from some es- caped denizen of hell.  There was some pe- culiarly abominable quality about them which made their de- struction seem almost a duty, and Johansen shows ingenuous wonder at the charge of ruthlessness brought against his party during the proceedings of the court of inquiry. 

The Tale of Inspector Legrasse
The older matters which had made the sculptor's dream and bas-relief so significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of his long manuscript. 's freighter Vigilant, bound from Valparaiso, arrived this morning at its wharf in Darling Harbour, having in tow the battled and disabled but heavily armed steam yacht Alert of Dunedin, N.  I visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse and others of that old-time raiding-party, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel pris- oners as still survived.  Cable advices from Dunedin report that the Alert was well known there as an island trader, and bore an evil reputation along the waterfront, It was owned by a curious group of half-castes whose frequent meetings and night trips to the woods attracted no little curiosity; and it had set sail in great haste just after the storm and earth tremors of March 1st.  For what could be the meaning of the queer clay bas-relief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which I found? Had my uncle, in his latter years become credulous of the most superficial

impostures? I resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor re- sponsible for this apparent disturbance of an old man's peace of mind.  Odd Idol Found in His Posses- sion.  What seemed to be the main document was headed "CTHULHU CULT" in characters painstakingly printed to avoid the erroneous reading of a word so unheard-of.  As my uncle went, as

poor Johansen went, so I shall go.  The chanted ritual was not the secret - that was never spoken aloud, only whispered. , Providence, R.  The tips of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the centre, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled-up, crouching hind legs gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of the way down toward the bottom of the pedestal.  In a short time I became convinced of his absolute sincerity, for he spoke of the dreams in a manner none could mistake.  . 
Out of that dream came rescue - the Vigilant, the vice-admir- alty court, the streets of Dunedin, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the Egeberg.  They had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought Their images with Them.  It represented a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind.  Loathsome- ness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the tottering cities of men.  His name was John Raymond Legrasse, and he was by profession an Inspector of Police.  Most were sea- men, and a sprinkling of Negroes and mulattoes, largely West Indians or Brava Portuguese from the Cape Verde Islands, gave a colouring of voodooism to the heterogeneous cult.  Then I thought with a shudder of what Old Castro had told Legrasse about the Old Ones; "They had come from the stars, and had brought Their images with Them.  He had told her no more than he told the public, but had left a long manuscript - of "technical matters" as he said - written in English, evidently in order to guard her from the peril of casual perusal.  Two Lascar sailors at once helped him to his feet, but before the ambulance could reach him he was dead.  The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated know- ledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the light into the peace and safety of a new dark age.  The image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed and carried back by Legrasse.  Upon retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean cities of Titan blocks and sky-flung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister with latent horror. 
He talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making me see with terrible vividness the damp Cyclopean city of slimy green stone - whose geometry, he oddly said, was all wrong - and hear with frightened expectancy the ceaseless, half-mental calling from underground: "Cthulhu fhtagn", "Cthulhu fhtagn.  The chant meant only this: "In his house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.  The next day, it ap- pears, they raised and landed on a small island, although none is known to exist in that part of the ocean; and six of the men somehow died ashore, though Johansen is queerly reticent about this part of his story, and speaks only of their falling into a rock chasm.  Inquiry to Follow. 
After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with sea- men and members of the vice-admiralty court.  During a walk through a narrow lane near the Gothenburg dock, a bundle of papers falling from an attic window had knocked him down. 
The bas-relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and about five by six inches in area; obviously of modern ori- gin. 
Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building in Tho- mas Street, a hideous Victorian imitation of seventeenth cen- tury Breton Architecture which flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovely colonial houses on the ancient hill, and under the very shadow of the finest Georgian steeple in America, I found him at work in his rooms, and at once conceded from the specimens scattered about that his genius is indeed profound and authentic.  It was, Johansen

said, like a great barn-door; and they all felt that it was a door because of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though they could not decide whether it lay flat like a trap-door or slantwise like an outside cellar-door.  From February 28 to April 2 a large proportion of them had dreamed very bizarre things, the intensity of the dreams being immeasurably the stronger during the period of the sculptor's delirium.  I mention his talk about angles because it suggests something Wilcox had told me of his awful dreams.  There were legends of a hidden lake unglimpsed by mor- tal sight, in which dwelt a huge, formless white polypous thing with luminous eyes; and squatters whispered that bat-winged devils flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at midnight.  Longitude 128°34', encountered the Alert, manned by a queer and evil-looking crew of Kanakas and half-castes. 
The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a stack of press cuttings, in Professor Angell's most recent hand; and made no pretense to literary style.  Those Old Ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first men, who formed a cult which had never died.  His ac- cursed city is sunken once more, for the Vigilant sailed over the spot after the April storm; but his ministers on earth still bellow and prance and slay around idol-capped monoliths in lonely places.  What motive promp- ted the hybrid crew to order back the Emma as they sailed about with their hideous idol? What was the unknown island on which six of the Emma's crew had died, and about which the mate Johansen was so secretive? What had the vice-admiralty's investigation brought out, and what was known of the noxious cult in Dunedin? And most marvelous of all, what deep and more than natural linkage of dates was this which gave a ma- lign and now undeniable significance to the various turns of events so carefully noted by my uncle?
March 1st - or February 28th according to the International Date Line - the earthquake and storm had come.  A reddish glare, too, seemed to filter through pale undergrowth beyond the endless avenues of forest night.  Later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious expression in dreams, in the bas-relief, and in the terrible statue I now beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent one.  The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter beginning tomorrow, at which every effort will be made to induce Johansen to speak more freely than he has done hitherto.  The statuette, idol, fetish, or whatever it was, had been captured some months before in the wooded swamps south of

New Orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoo meeting; and so singular and hideous were the rites connected with it, that the police could not but realize that they had stumbled on a dark cult totally unknown to them, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of the African voodoo circles.  Mankind was not absolutely alone among the conscious things of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithful few. 
I had largely given over my inquiries into what Professor An- gell called the "Cthulhu Cult", and was visiting a learned friend in Paterson, New Jersey; the curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of note.  A sad-faced woman in black answered my summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she told me in halting English that Gustaf Johansen was no more.  Here was a nocturnal suicide in London, where a lone sleeper had leaped from a window after a shock- ing cry.  Some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and the secret cult would always be waiting to liberate him.  He had cried out in the night, arousing several other artists in the building, and had

manifested since then only alternations of unconsciousness and delirium. " The other manuscript papers were brief notes, some of them accounts of the queer dreams of different persons, some of them citations from theosophical books and magazines (notably W.  Awe at the unbelievable size of the greenish stone blocks, at the dizzying height of the great carven mono- lith, and at the stupefying identity of the colossal statues and bas-reliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the Alert, is poignantly visible in every line of the mates frightened description. 
Theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein our world and human race form transient incidents. 

The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of panic, mania, and eccentricity during the given period.  Rescued Seaman Refuses Par- ticulars of Strange Experience.  Tale of Des- perate Battle and Deaths at Sea.  It was not allied to the European witch-cult, and was virtually unknown beyond its members.  A pulpy, tentacled head surmoun- ted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary wings; but it was the general outline of the whole which made it most shock- ingly frightful.  Longitude 152°17', with one living and one dead man aboard.  Its vast, awesome, and incalculable age was unmistakable; yet not one link did it

shew with any known type of art belonging to civilization’s youth - or indeed to any other time.  Louis. 
Donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and rejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the monstrously carven portal.  Longitude 123°43', come upon a coastline of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy Cyclopean ma- sonry which can be nothing less than the tangible substance of earth's supreme terror - the nightmare corpse-city of R'lyeh, that was built in measureless aeons behind history by the vast, loathsome shapes that seeped down from the dark stars. 

The Madness from the Sea
If heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effa- cing of the results of a mere chance which fixed my eye on a certain stray piece of shelf-paper.  He cut himself off hurriedly, and no amount of persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this direc- tion.  Locally, interest was intensified by the obscurity of the cause of death.  Duty came first; and although there must have been nearly a hundred mongrel celebrants in the throng, the police relied on their firearms and plunged determinedly into the nauseous rout.  On this now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality than any but a Sime or an Angarola could paint.  Knowing that the Thing could surely overtake the Alert until steam was fully up, he re- solved on a desperate chance; and, setting the engine for full speed, ran lightning-like on deck and reversed the wheel.  The present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe of this abhorred area, but that location was bad enough; hence perhaps the very place of the worship had terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds and incidents. . "
It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upon a sleeping memory and won the fevered interest

of my uncle.  Waterfront scum was far too common for special mention; though there was vague talk about one in- land trip these mongrels had made, during which faint drum- ming and red flame were noted on the distant hills. 
It was a simple, rambling thing - a naive sailor's effort at a post-facto diary - and strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage.  a survival of a hugely remote period when.  He will, I believe, some time be heard from as one of the great decadents; for he has crystallised in clay and will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and phantasies which Arthur Machen evokes in prose, and Clark Ashton Smith makes visible in verse and in painting.  Everyone listened, and everyone was listening still when It lumbered slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green immens- ity through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that poison city of madness.  Then, indeed, I succeeded in open- ing it, but when I did so seemed only to be confronted by a greater and more closely locked barrier. .  Even the Providence Art Club, anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found him quite hopeless.  Physicians were unable to find any visible disorder, but concluded after perplexed debate that some obscure lesion of the heart, induced by the brisk as- cent of so steep a hill by so elderly a man, was responsible for the end.  He could not tell - they would think him mad.  Of its ori- gin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the captured members, absolutely nothing was to be dis- covered; hence the anxiety of the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place the frightful symbol, and through it track down the cult to its fountain-head.  Five of the worshippers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were carried away on improvised stretchers by their fellow-prisoners.  The dream-narratives and cuttings collected by the professor were, of course, strong corrobora- tion; but the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of the whole subject led me to adopt what I thought the most sensible conclusions.  My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox afterwards said, for his slowness in recognizing both hieroglyphics and pictorial design.  forms of which poetry and legend alone have caught a flying memory and called them gods, monsters, mythical beings of all sorts and kinds. 
Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed-blooded, and mentally aberrant type.  Ugly roots and ma- lignant hanging nooses of Spanish moss beset them, and now and then a pile of dank stones or fragment of a rotting wall in- tensified by its hint of morbid habitation a depression which every malformed tree and every fungous islet combined to cre- ate. "
Legrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several among his mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the words meant.  The cuttings largely alluded to outré mental illness and outbreaks of group folly or mania in the spring of 1925.  Scott-Elliot's Atlantis and the Lost Lemuria), and the rest comments on long-surviving secret

societies and hidden cults, with references to passages in such mythological and anthropological source-books as Frazer's Golden Bough and Miss Murray's Witch-Cult in Western Europe. 
Dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned lan- guidly at my knock and asked me my business without rising. 
Legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had
inquired in vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. 
That my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor I did not wonder, for what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what Legrasse had learned of the cult, of a sens- itive young man who had dreamed not only the figure and ex- act hieroglyphics of the swamp-found image and the Greenland devil tablet, but had come in his dreams upon at least three of the precise words of the formula uttered alike by Esquimaux diabolists and mongrel Louisianans? Professor Angell's instant

start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness was emin- ently natural; though privately I suspected young Wilcox of having heard of the cult in some indirect way, and of having in- vented a series of dreams to heighten and continue the mys- tery at my uncle's expense.  Having noted and copied an oral ritual among the swamp cult-worshippers his men had arrested, he besought the pro- fessor to remember as best he might the syllables taken down amongst the diabolist Esquimaux.  And so numerous are the recorded troubles in insane asylums that only a miracle can have stopped the medical fraternity from noting strange parallelisms and drawing mystified conclu- sions.  All this Johansen did not suspect, but God knows he soon saw enough!
I suppose that only a single mountain-top, the hideous monolith-crowned citadel whereon great Cthulhu was buried,

actually emerged from the waters. ", and the second, "Narrative of Inspector John R.  Legrasse, 121 Bienville St.  Many of his questions seemed highly out of place to his visitor, especially those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults or societies; and Wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silence which he was offered in exchange for an admission of member- ship in some widespread mystical or paganly religious body.  Legrasse for some time lent the im- age to Professor Webb, but at the latter's death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where I viewed it not long ago.  Whether I shall go as he did remains to be seen, for I have learned much now. 
Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of theosophists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed.  There was a secret which even torture could not extract.  No man had ever seen the Old Ones. 
That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the tin box beside the bas-relief and the papers of Professor Angell.  He did not try to navigate after the first bold flight, for the reaction had taken something out of his soul.  Death would be a boon if only it could blot out the memories.  Then came the storm of April 2nd, and a gather- ing of the clouds about his consciousness.  When the stars were right, They could plunge from

world to world through the sky; but when the stars were wrong, They could not live. 
This man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strange story of piracy and slaughter.  Average people in society and business - New England's traditional "salt of the earth" - gave an almost completely negative result, though scattered cases of uneasy but formless nocturnal im- pressions appear here and there, always between March 23 and April 2 - the period of young Wilcox's delirium.  He sat upright in bed, astonished to find him- self at home and completely ignorant of what had happened in dream or reality since the night of March 22.  Latit- ude 34°21', W.  Here likewise a rambling letter to the editor of a paper in South America, where a fanatic deduces a dire future from visions he has seen. 
The matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at times I had visions of personal fame from researches into its origin and connections.  He indeed went so far as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a glimpse of shining eyes and a mountainous white bulk bey- ond the remotest trees but I suppose he had been hearing too much native superstition.  This manuscript was divided into two sections, the first of which was headed "1925 - Dream and Dream Work of H.