  

The Bloody Square 

The bodies would be dumped in the square at night so that everyone would see them the next 
morning on their way to work.   How could something like that happen in our capital city and in a mosque? A 
mosque is a sacred place for us.   

My father said it was a shameful day.   

At the start of May our army launched Operation True Path to drive the Taliban out of Swat.   I couldnt 
think straight.   He ended it with Lincolns words: it is 
far more honourable to fail than to cheat .   I had told everyone in my class that the Taliban wouldnt go 
through with it.   Then the morning after, 
on TV, we would hear of more Taliban killings and wonder what the army was doing with all its 
booming cannons and why they could not even stop the daily broadcasts on Mullah FM.   I wont tell anyone.   In Swat the doctors had told him this was something simple, now 
it seemed very serious.   Sir, the school you 
are running is Western and infidel, it said.   

My mother gave them tea and food but that wasnt why they came.   

This didnt mean we went easy on the army.   My room was at the front with lots of windows and I kept the 
curtains open.   Khushal had his appendix out too.   Pacha and his wife Jajai became his second family.   They became known as Shias, shortened from ShiatAli, the 
Party of Ali.   Hidayatullah laughed.   On the night of 7 October 2008 we heard a series of faraway blasts.   

Down below, my mother was watching from the roof of our house.   

General Kayani was adamant that the Americans should not be involved because of the ongoing 
bad relations between the two countries after the Raymond Davis episode and the bin Laden raid as 
well as the killing of some Pakistani soldiers at a border post by a US helicopter.   

I just want to know if my husband is dead or not, pleaded one lady I met.   The boys learn the Quran by heart, rocking 
back and forth as they recite.   If we advertise we wont be able to watch it.   Blackskinned people 
are often called white and short people tall.   She was under Your care and You are bound to give her 
back.   There was 
no response from Muslim Khan because his phone interview had been prerecorded.   They told him that my national and international profile meant I had 
attracted attention and death threats from the Taliban and that I needed protection.   

People warned my father to leave the hospital.   We 
were supposed to be allies and we had lost more soldiers in their War on Terror than they had.   

At least there was no sign of the Taliban.   
The nurse took him into a room.   When I saw him disappear down 
there I would cry, thinking he wouldnt come back.   A few 
weeks before, we had met the American video journalist Adam Ellick in Peshawar.   Everyone was excited because they hoped Sufi Mohammad would 
proclaim peace and victory and ask the Taliban to lay down their arms.   I loved it and 
dreamed of one day going to New York and working on a magazine like her.   I was shot by a Taliban bullet and was 
flown out of Pakistan unconscious.   An American senator said 
that the only thing missing from bin Laden s hideaway was a neon sign .   After paying the rent and salaries, there was little 
money left for food.   She saw me gossiping with a 
girl in the year above and told me, Now you are with Resham and I am with Rida.   My father, Ziauddin, is different 
from most Pashtun men.   This was a bit different when we wrote about subjects close to our hearts these 
were topics like extremism and the Taliban rather than clothes and hairstyles.   The man told him the shopkeeper had 
given him a photocopied letter.   When you want something all the universe conspires in helping you achieve 
it, it says.   

But I said, Education is education.   There wasnt time to fetch my mother so 
Maryam insisted she would go too as I might need a womans help.   One day my mother went shopping with my cousin as 
she was getting married and wanted to buy things for her wedding.   

I liked to sit on the roof and watch the mountains and dream.   If they killed him then I 
can put the children in an orphanage.   We had never seen our city like this.   Now we are a country of 180 million and more than 96 per cent 
are Muslim We also have around two million Christians and more than two million Ahmadis, who 
say they are Muslims though our government says they are not.   Time 
to get up, Jani muri, he would say.   Colonel Junaid 
ordered a third CT scan.   

I tried to distract myself by reading Stephen Hawkings A Brief History of Time, which answered 
big questions such as how the universe began and whether time could run backwards.   We had been so happy, then something very bad had 
come into our lives and we were now waiting for our happy ending.   Running a school is not a crime, he told them.   Her name was Shiza 
Shahid and she came from Islamabad.   There 
was much more to come.   It seemed to me that before Pakistan there was endless fighting between Hindus and Muslims.   Most had never received so much money at once.   But at the 
time it was kept a secret.   My father was astonished and pleased 
 in our country few doctors bother explaining anything to an illiterate woman.   
Sunni comes from the Arabic for one who follows the traditions of the Prophet.   My dream was coming true.   My father said you couldnt really blame people 
for leaving as the government had no power.   In the winter everything was white snow, long icicles hanging from the roof like daggers, 
which we loved to snap off.   Who is in charge here the government or Fazlullah? 

But we still believed in peace.   For Gods sake be careful, he warned.   Look, Khaista, said my mother.   
Now we had become the valley of sorrows, said my cousin Sultan Rome.   Inside the HQ we saw offices 
with banks of televisions, men monitoring every channel, and one officer showed my father a thick 
file of cuttings which contained every mention of the army in that days papers.   My mother told me 
off and apologised to the cart owner.   The Taliban said girls could go to school after the peace agreement but they should be 
veiled and covered.   I am president of the 
Global Peace Council, the spokesperson of the council of elders, the president of the Swat 
Association of Private Schools, director of my school and head of my family.   It was my 
mother who would wake up early in the morning, iron our school clothes, make our breakfast and 
teach us how to behave.   

Just when it seemed matters could not get worse, the area was hit by flash floods.   
This was the war I was going to fight.   These girls should be in purdah He told her, Take this building back from him 
and I will rent it for my madrasa.   You teach girls and have a uniform that is un Islamic.   I think I am a bit of 
a disappointment to her as I am so like my father and dont bother with clothes and jewels.   Am I in an office or am I in a 
police station or a court? Am I a criminal? He decided to challenge the officials to protect other 
school owners from such bullying and corruption.   We drank green tea as we could not afford milk for regular tea.   I loved the rich soil, the 
greenness of the plants, the crops, the buffaloes and the yellow butterflies that fluttered about me as I 
walked.   So British India was 
divided in August 1947, and an independent Muslim state was born.   Its my duty to 
do so.   Thats also why we rarely say thank you, manana, because we believe 
a Pashtun will never forget a good deed and is bound to reciprocate at some point, just as he will a 
bad one.   
Thats the closing shot in one part of the documentary.   

It was around the time he was praying to go to heaven as a martyr that he met my mothers brother, 
Faiz Mohammad, and started mixing with her family and going to her fathers hujra.   I have no militants and no FM radio, he 
joked.   I will use it to make everyone happy As soon as I finished praying, I would check the 
drawer.   



I cant take any more! 

By this time the two former friends were hardly speaking to each other and had to call in local 
elders to mediate.   
Teach him, if you can, the wonder of books .   Sangota 



school has been there since the 1960s and never converted anyone to Christianity in fact some of 
them converted to Islam.   Many of my friends had left the valley so they could be educated in Peshawar, but my father 
insisted we would not leave.   

Eventually my mother interrupted him.   

In Swat it was safer in the town than in the remote areas and many of our family came from the 
countryside to stay with us.   


I woke up on 16 October, a week after the shooting.   But now he was irritated.   Show us how you did it! we all clamoured, but he wouldnt.   
Other important people will soon become victims.   This is my number, call me.   He recognised the number as the Khushal 
School and passed the phone to his friend Ahmad Shah to answer.   But they were so 
captivated by the beauty of Swat they instead decided to stay there and forced the other tribes out.   

We came home from school late that day.   

When I was born we were very poor.   

We drove out of the bazaar, past the grinning red mouth signs for dentists, the carts stacked with 
wooden cages crammed with beadyeyed white chickens with scarlet beaks, and jewellery stores 
with windows full of gold wedding bangles.   My mother and father sat outside the operating theatre.   People often said the Taliban might kill my father but not me.   1 congratulate her.   

When we arrived back at school after Eid, we saw a letter taped to the gate.   Mullahs from the TNSM preached that the earthquake was a warning from God.   We will be like preachers of education, I 
said.   It was the worst flood in living memory.   

In the village the day started early and even I, who liked to sleep late, woke with the sound of 
cocks crowing and the clatter of dishes as the women prepared breakfast for the men.   Baba also gave him a 
deep love of learning and knowledge as well as a keen awareness of peoples rights, which my father 
has passed on to me.   But she never banned me from doing anything.   

I cant say that was the worst day.   For us in Swat this was very 
close to home.   It didnt 
sound as though he had put up a fight.   

My father was glad he didnt hear what she had told Dr Javid.   When a man tried to help her she refused and said.   When the school opened they had just three 
students.   By then I was used to meeting politicians.   Terror had made people 
cruel.   It was clear the 
superintendent wanted money.   

The first thing I thought when I came round was, Thank God Im not dead.   We 
had to climb onto a huge boulder in a field, and even then we rarely had more than one bar of 
reception so we hardly ever spoke to him But after we had been in Shangla for about six weeks, my 
father said we could travel to Peshawar, where he had been staying in one room with three friends.   They had only announced their mission to the army chief of staff, 
General Ashfaq Kayani, and President Zardari after the event.   Sharif was accused of treason and only saved by his friends in the 
Saudi royal family, who arranged his exile.   Hello, 
BhabiV I called.   One of his friends went instead.   

Jinnah had lived in London as a young man and trained as a barrister.   He believes he might even have thought of becoming a 
suicide bomber had there been such a thing in those days.   

I had never written a diary before and didnt know how to begin.   

The girl was played by Moniba, of course, and another classmate Attiya played the part of my 
assistant to add some salt, pepper and masala with her witty asides.   Everyone wanted to see the back of the corrupt government officials sent into the valley.   He watched paralysed with fear as they almost 
touched the water.   O God, let 
me give the rest of my life to her; I have lived enough.   Who will reconstruct all these buildings and schools? she 
wanted to know.   They were also tired of the 
endless bloodshed.   But I was more concerned with matters closer to home our own street to 
be exact.   That maulana has a bad eye 
onus, said my father one day.   It was the first targeted killing in Swat, and people said it was because 
he had helped the army find Taliban hideouts.   All the children gathered around our teachers as chicks swarm to 
a mother hen.   They heard that offers 
were pouring in from overseas to treat me including from America, where a top hospital called Johns 
Hopkins had offered free treatment.   The previous tenants had also run a school the Ramada School.   It made me think 
of old war movies or the video games my brother Khushal loves to play.   Another was a girl in my class called Kausar, whose 
father embroidered clothes and shawls a trade our region is famous for.   

I wanted to cry because I felt in my heart I might never see my home again.   Instead they advanced to the east and on 16 November 
captured Alpuri, the main town of Shangla.   Respected Ambassador, I request you, please help us girls to get an education, I said.   It was a girl about my age.   How could a notorious terrorist be hiding in Pakistan and 
remain undetected for so many years? he asked.   I wanted to talk to the children but I was too scared.   Then as evening came it fell in shadow as the sun moved up the Black 
Mountain.   Most of it had gone to the army; ordinary 
people received nothing.   But there was no freedom of expression, and if anyone criticised the 
wali, they could be expelled from the valley.   

My uncle was more dutiful.   

Unlike my father, I took precautions.   Policemen 
were so scared of being killed that they took out adverts in the newspapers to announce they had left 



the force.   Her mother, my grandmother, had looked after all eight children 
alone after my grandfather had an accident and broke his pelvis and could not leave his bed for eight 
years.   You should 
close it.   If shes on her own with two boys 
in Mingora, anything could happen to them! 

My father called the colonel.   My father was known 
in the family as Khaista dada, which means beautiful.   Again we got the same, so we both got the prize.   
Many people protested outside courthouses or put up posters of their missing but got nowhere.   I arrived at dawn as the last star blinked out.   To 
make us wash, our aunts told stories about a scary woman called Shashaka, who would come after 
you with her muddy hands and stinking breath if you didnt take a bath or wash your hair, and turn you 
into a dirty woman with hair like rats tails filled with insects.   He followed me to the house and put a note inside our gate where I would see it.   He would go crying to my mother and I would go to my father.   We also have the AhleHadith 
(people of the Hadith), who are Salafists.   Some people 
said that Fazlullah had been captured but that the army and the ISI couldnt agree on what to do with 
him.   They were mostly boys 
although eleven girls from my school went along.   My palms were sweating and my 
mouth was as dry as paper.   The hospital was 
only five minutes away.   
They told my father that the police had turned up at the house and demanded to know whether we had 
received any threats.   I 
was happy when the exam was over, chatting and gossiping with my friends as we waited for Sher 
Mohammad Baba, a school assistant, to call for us when the bus arrived.   
Hidayatullah was furious.   Janser Khans hujra was a 
gathering place for people to talk politics, and my father was often there, so they had got to know each 
other.   
Their home was in Spal Bandi, a beautiful mountain village on the way to the White Palace, and my 
father describes it as a romantic and inspirational place.   The main road to 
our village from Alpuri, the capital of Shangla, had been washed away, and entire villages were 
submerged.   I was only eleven years old but I 
felt as though I had lost everything.   He promised 
he would make his own assets and tax return public.   Not only did our army and ISI have long links with 
some of the militants, but it also meant our troops would be fighting their own Pashtun brothers.   

Our street could not be reached by car, so coming home I would get off the bus on the road below 
by the stream and go through a barred iron gate and up a flight of steps.   As a teacher he was 
eligible for a discount on his sons school fees for sports and joining the Boy Scouts.   

Then on 1 December 2009 there was a suicide attack on a wellknown local ANP politician and 
member of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa assembly, Dr Shamsher Ali Khan.   Her family had moved to 
Karachi to get away from the conflict and, as a woman, she could not live alone.   

In my dreams about the shooting my father is also in the bus and he is shot with me, and then there 
are men everywhere and I am searching for my father.   We read that more lives had been affected 
and more damage had been caused by the floods than the Asian tsunami, our 2005 earthquake, 
Hurricane Katrina and the Haiti earthquake combined.   

The mullah clearly wasnt happy as he wanted the school closed altogether.   We need to operate now to give her a 
chance, he said.   The whole episode had been a matter of botched bureaucracy.   My 
grandfather suggested that he might take my father in so he could go to college there.   What we need to know is who imposed these militants on us, he wrote.   We thought speaking in English meant you were more 
intelligent.   

When my father read it, he went pale.   Sometimes they would get stuck and he would 
repeat the same syllable over and over like a record caught in a groove as we all waited for the next 
syllable to suddenly pop out.   
You can stay there accepting everything from the Taliban or you can make a stand against them 

My father told us what Hidayatullah had said.   
My father tried to counter their propaganda but it was hard.   First my father would try to rouse me.   Instead he appeared to threaten the whole nation.   She told my father, You dont 
have to come, but I am going and I will take the children to Shangla.   He told people the correct 
way to do their ablutions for prayers which body part to wash first.   

* 

A few months after that, in October 20 1 1 my father told me he had received an email informing him I 
was one of five nominees for the international peace prize of KidsRights, a childrens advocacy 
group based in Amsterdam.   They knew he would have something interesting to say at workshops 
and seminars and wasnt afraid to criticise the authorities, even the army, which was now running our 
country.   Some people are afraid of ghosts, some of spiders or snakes in 
those days we were afraid of our fellow human beings.   Some of the richer parents 
took their children out of the school when they realised they were sharing classrooms with the sons 
and daughters of people who cleaned their houses or stitched their clothes.   

This was the start of real trouble.   At that moment I was very happy.   

My father sent food and aid to Shangla using money collected by friends and the Swat Association 
of Private Schools.   His own father was just an ordinary soldier and 
died young, leaving him as the eldest son of eight to support his entire family.   Hed 
boast, Ziauddin is a shaheen  a falcon because this is a creature that flies high above other birds.   This was the fear 
that filled our daily lives.   Back then, they said, the mountains were all still covered in trees, there were 
schools every five kilometres and the wali sahib would visit them in person to resolve problems.   

When he got to the hospital only one other member of the jirga committee was there.   One of the people arrested was our old Urdu teacher who had 
refused to teach girls and had instead gone to help Fazlullahs men collect and destroy CDs and 
DVDs.   We 



can pray to God.   Here was a man who had read so many 
books, who wrote her poems she could not read, and whose ambition was to have his own school.   By the roadside were fresh springs 
and waterfalls, and when we stopped for a break and to drink some tea, the air was clean and fragrant 
with cedar and pine.   The 
women spent their days looking after the children and preparing food to serve to the men in their 
hujra upstairs.   It was high for Mingora, two storeys with a big water tank on the roof.   There was really only one subject 9/11.   

The pressure from the whole country worked, and Fazlullah agreed to lift the ban for girls up to ten 
years old Year 4.   He promised to meet us later in Shangla.   
Fazlullah retreated into the mountains.   The 
worst moment for her was when someone came to the house with my front door keys, which had been 
found at the scene of the shooting.   One version was that they tried to persuade Asia Bibi to convert to Islam.   He took off his turban and put it in my fathers lap.   Soon everyone was 
weeping.   

My father seemed worried and shooed us into the other room, but the house was small so we could 
hear every word.   Our 
people are used to being subservient because under the wali no criticism was tolerated.   People asked how we could be spending $6 billion a year on the 
military (seven times more than we were spending on education), if four American helicopters could 
just sneak in under our radar? And if they could do it, what was to stop the Indians next door? Please 
dont honk, the army is sleeping, said one text, and Secondhand Pakistani radar for sale .   It was like when you pour water onto a blazing fire the flames are suddenly 
extinguished.   Our home was always full of people 
visiting from the village.   



When he met his fellow activists, particularly his old friends Ahmad Shah, Mohammad Farooq and 
Zahid Khan, I often went with him Ahmad Shah also had a school, where Mohammad Farooq 
worked, and they would sometimes gather on his lawn.   It was Honesty is the best policy.   My 
fathers close friend Wahid Zamans brother and brotherinlaw were among the many who went to 
Afghanistan.   It was there I spent my 
twelfth birthday.   One night there was a small explosion in their village 
and the wife cried.   

My fathers friend Hidayatullah had become a government official in Peshawar and warned us, 



This is how these militants work.   The numbers were unbelievable.   My grandfather wrote his speeches 
and he almost always came first, gaining a reputation locally as an impressive speaker.   I did not like going barefoot.   

My father called my cousin Khanjee to find out how widely the letters had been distributed.   It might have 
changed the whole world but we were living right in the epicentre of everything.   

We had moved again we would move seven times by the time I was thirteen and were living in 
an apartment building.   How was it possible that we were now garlanding murderers? 

Shortly after that my father got another death threat.   Lets wait and see, he said.   My father broke the seal on the wooden storage box of maize and filled their 
bowls.   

Ziauddin was a family man and they were unusually close, said Hidayatullah.   In the far 
distance we could see the snows of Malam Jabba, our ski resort.   

It took them two goes to destroy it.   .   During the night American special forces called Navy Seals had carried out a raid in 
Abbottabad, one of the places wed stayed as IDPs, and had found and killed Osama bin Laden.   People 
reassured my mother that although I had been shot in the head, the bullet had just skimmed my 
forehead.   Four days after the ban on girls 
schools, five more were destroyed.   After the wedding my mother moved in with my grandfather and my 
uncle.   In high school I read some Sherlock Holmes and laughed to see that this was the same battle 
where Dr Watson was wounded before becoming partner to the great detective.   The peace deal was merely 
a mirage.   

In Pakistan when women say they want independence, people think this means we dont want to 
obey our fathers, brothers or husbands.   

Journey into the Unknown 



I was shot on a Tuesday at lunchtime.   Twice bombs went off when I was in the kitchen, 
so close by that the whole house rattled and the fan above the window fell down.   It would be better to plead, OK, 
shoot me, but first listen to me.   It was a journey of just five minutes 
along the stinky stream, past the giant billboard for Dr Humayuns Hair Transplant Institute where we 
joked that one of our bald male teachers must have gone when he suddenly started to sprout hair.   
He had an old radio set my uncle still has, on which he loved to listen to the news.   The army and Taliban had fought street to street and almost every wall was 
pockmarked with bullet holes.   I didnt mind; I just 
wanted to be friends.   They looked so dark and dirty that my fathers 
friend described them as people deprived of baths and barbers.   Were she to 



break that tradition, men and women would talk against her, particularly those in our own family.   The villagers were helpless.   So strong was the force of the water that even concrete buildings had been 



reduced to rubble.   We dont 
know what the doctor injected her with but she went into shock and died.   But when half of 
your leaders tell lies and the other half is negotiating with the Taliban, there is nowhere to go.   The 
Americans cut off aid.   He 
was very kind and sent us 1,100,000 rupees so my father could pay everyone three months backpay.   They were 
now state sanctioned terrorists.   When my father tells me stories of his childhood, he always 
says that though Baba was a difficult man he gave him the most important gift the gift of education.   We normally dont have monsoons in Swat and at first we were happy, thinking 
the rain would mean a good harvest.   

Its like when one mixes milk with tea, I said.   Every day his fellow activists came to the shack or the school for lunch.   

In reality what happened was we suddenly stopped.   Shabana was not a Muslim, they said.   

Over a hundred soldiers had been killed in the military operation and 900 injured, and they wanted 
to show themselves as heroes.   One of his friends had persuaded him to participate in a 
documentary for the New York Times website to show the world what was happening to us.   They praised Fazlullah and talked 
of his long hair, the way he rode a horse and behaved like the Prophet.   She had said I was salvageable 1 
had had the right surgery at the right time but my chances of recovery were now being compromised 
by the aftercare.   Thirty four of our fortytwo bridges had been washed 
away, cutting off much of the valley.   We should focus on practical 
issues.   

The road up the small hill is usually busy as it is a short cut but that day it was strangely quiet.   It was complete Talibanisation humming, said my father.   T bought it in the bazaar, she said.   Youre the doctor.   

As we drove on, the landscape changed to paddy fields of deep lush green that smelt so fresh and 
orchards of apricot and fig trees.   But the elders were 
happy with this compromise and they left.   The 
nations prayers are with you and your daughter, he told my father.   Before Abbottabad hed 
been in Haripur and before that hidden away in our own Swat Valley, where he met Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammad, the mastermind of 9/ 1 1 .   Then, under 
the pretext of bringing in aid, they could legitimately enter Pakistan and spy on all our secrets.   Dont do that, 
Maryam said.   He knew if she had been alive, she would have been on his side.   

It was thrilling to see my words on the website.   We saw an official from the United Nations say on television that it was the worst logistical 
nightmare that the UN had ever faced.   If anyone 
offended him, their entire family could be expelled from Swat.   First they turned on a tap to wash their hands and discovered there was no water.   

When my mother arrived they hugged and held back tears.   When 
the NGOs received threatening letters from the Taliban and went to the DC to ask for his help, he 
wouldnt even listen to them.   He didnt know why he was speaking to me in English.   The words came out wrong.   We had been 
getting threats all year.   There had been an outcry, and the Taliban spokesman Muslim Khan had 
called on the doctor to reopen it.   There was little to do.   Mingora was expanding quickly around 175,000 
people now called it home and our oncefresh air was becoming very polluted from all the vehicles 
and cooking fires.   

A nurse gave me a pencil and a pad.   

Why dont you come and live with us? asked Nasir Pacha.   As a guest, he was treated 
exceptionally well.   I kept thinking of my school bag at home 
with copies of Oliver Twist and Romeo and Juliet waiting to be read and the Ugly Betty DVDs on the 
shelf.   There were pictures of me 
everywhere receiving the awards she had disapproved of.   

It was very emotional to see him again.   The governor of our province issued a statement 
that anyone who wanted to fight in Afghanistan against NATO forces was free to do so.   One said he had been ordered by Mullah Fazlullah 
to help build his centre in Imam Deri.   Sufi Mohammad had been in jail since 2002 when Musharraf arrested a number of 
militant leaders after American pressure, but his organisation still continued and was being run by his 
soninlaw Maulana Fazlullah.   We believe Allah listens more closely to the 
whitehaired.   In our country of course this often means the 
military.   The whole affair left a lot of bad feeling, particularly because on 17 March, 
the day after Davis was released, a drone attack on a tribal council in North Waziristan killed about 
forty people.   Our men think earning money and ordering around others is where power lies.   

There was also Nooria, whose mother Kharoo did some of our washing and cleaning, and Alishpa, 
one of the daughters of Khalida, the woman who helped my mother with the cooking.   It was very hard.   Shazia had been hit twice, in the left collarbone and palm, and had been 
brought to the hospital with me.   At that time talib simply meant religious 
student.   When I was little I went to the bazaar with my mother and spotted a pile of 
almonds on a cart.   The people who live in the FATA are all 
from Pashtun tribes like us Yousafzai, and live on both sides of the border with Afghanistan.   

Dr Javid had known this was coming.   

Swat was one of the places most affected.   

The original idea for the documentary had been to follow my father on the last day of school, but at 
the end of the meeting Irfan asked me, What would you do if there comes a day when you cant go 
back to your valley and school? I said this wouldnt happen.   He used to climb up electricity poles to hang banners advertising the school, even though 
he was so afraid of heights that when he got to the top of the ladder his feet shook.   My father says that Pakistan has been cursed with more than its fair share of politicians 
who only think about money.   
My mother and brothers had no passports or documentation.   People in 
Buner had always resisted the Taliban but they were ordered by the local authorities not to fight.   

My father was in awe of my grandfather and told me wonderful stories about him, but he also told 
me that he was a man who could not meet the high standards he set for others.   My father was told that even my brothers would not be 
spared.   Though he usually dressed in 
uniform, he occasionally wore Western suits and he called himself chief executive instead of chief 
martial law administrator.   Thats how we think of each other.   If you have a 
headache and tell the doctor you have a stomach ache, how can the doctor help? You must speak the 
truth.   He tried to talk to them but they ran away.   I was one of the three shortest girls in my class of thirty.   One black day they even dynamited 
the face of the Jehanabad Buddha, which was carved into a hillside just half an hours drive from 
Mingora and towered twentythree feet into the sky.   Thats why he 
decided he would make his father proud by entering the districts annual public speaking competition.   Hardly any 
women from these areas can read.   I was cross.   Id heard you were an infidel, he said to my father, but there 
are Qurans in your room 

Of course there are! replied my father, astonished that his faith would be questioned.   

Then I went and sat on my bed.   

At first we assumed our government had known and been involved in the American operation.   

Moniba, Ayesha and I also started learning about journalism from a British organisation called the 
Institute for War and Peace Reporting, which ran a project called Open Minds Pakistan.   Dont you think she is meant for the skies? Fathers 
can be very embarrassing.   

My father used some of the money to buy me a new bed and cabinet and pay for tooth implants for 
my mother and a piece of land in Shangla.   They are saying they will destroy the mountain but they cant even control the road.   It cant be repaid with expressions like thank 
you.   


Growing up in a School 



My mother started school when she was six and stopped the same term She was unusual in the 
village as she had a father and brothers who encouraged her to go to school.   I cannot leave the area.   They had no clean water as the river was brown 
with wreckage and debris.   

Many of the militants in the mosque had fought in Afghanistan or Kashmir.   

Giving places to poor children didnt just mean my father lost their fees.   A nice lady in a headscarf held my hand and said, Asalaamu alaikum which is 
our traditional Muslim greeting.   He pushed through the 
people and ran through the camera flashes into the hospital.   She will cook and wash for us.   

Afterwards we went into the small museum at the back, which had displays of the special white 
bow ties Jinnah used to order from Paris, his threepiece suits tailored in London, his golf clubs and a 
special travelling box with drawers for twelve pairs of shoes including his favourite twotone 
brogues.   Once she was ready, the bride would start crying and we 
would stroke her hair and try to convince her not to worry.   Our home is in Shangla.   We dont understand why hes been 
attacked when they claim theres peace, he said.   The school was doing well, and my father was building an 
impressive reception with an arched entrance in the boys high school.   We played marbles in the yard over and over again.   A 


At school my father organised a peace march and encouraged us to speak out against what was 
happening.   My 
father always answered the door as women must stay inside.   
Everyone brought what they could.   

Nobody consulted my mother and father on what should happen to me.   At that time 
suicide bombings were rare in Pakistan there were six in total that year and it was the biggest 
attack that had ever been carried out by Pakistani militants.   But he had been lucky.   The Marghazar stream loops through it, milky brown from the plastic bags 
and rubbish thrown into it.   We enjoyed peace festivals with music and dancing, unheard of under the 
Taliban.   
Danger began to creep closer.   I had a 
window seat and could see the deserts and mountains of our land below me.   I am representing the Ulema and Tablighian and Taliban, Mullah Ghulamullah 
said, referring to not just one but two organisations of Muslim scholars to give himself gravitas.   

My father told the clerk to call him next time he saw the maulana.   Benazirs bus was blown up in a 
wave of orange flame.   She 
insisted we leave, but my father was exhausted and we Muslims believe our fate is written by God.   

As we had no relatives in Mardan we were planning to make our way to Shangla, our family 
village.   He told 
other boys to stop playing marbles in the dust and to play cricket instead so their clothes and hands 
wouldnt get dirty.   Thats what they did in Waziristan when they went after kidnappers and bandits.   Just the day before the barber had told a journalist that the Taliban were good Muslims.   Where did you get 
that? I asked.   From there they were running 
training camps and launching raids across the border on NATO troops.   As a nation we have always been good at hockey, but Zia made 



our female hockey players wear baggy trousers instead of shorts, and stopped women playing some 
sports altogether.   So many journalists thronged to the school that day that it turned 
into a news studio.   Some people took sacks of sugar and flour, and most of the baggage was tied to the top of 
the bus in a towering pile.   We had recently got some 
pets three white chickens and a white rabbit that one of Khushals friends had given him and which 
we let wander around the house.   Finally it landed and I was taken on board with 
my father, my cousin Khanjee, Ahmad Shah and Maryam.   

The colonel then said, Lets go to the hospital as there are other documents to sign.   Sometimes we covered our ears or buried our heads under 
pillows, but the guns were close by and the noise was too loud to block out.   Everyone had to 
leave the district.   He was relieved but baffled.   Then three top surgeons from the 
province came to examine me.   

He also felt he could never do enough to please my grandfather.   He called him his monkey.   

A man goes out to work, he earns a wage, he comes back home, he eats, he sleeps.   His skin looked paperthin.   We 
didnt lead a life of luxury we Pashtuns prefer to sit on floors rather than chairs.   It was 
also a way to answer growing American criticism that our military was helping the Taliban rather 
than trying to stop them.   The Sangota girls were also very bright, which meant more 
competition.   

Maryam tried to find out more about what was going on.   We did not 
know then that Musharraf was also letting the Americans use our airfields.   The most popular part of his show came every evening when he would read 
out peoples names.   My father raised money from the 
Swat Association of Private Schools and the Global Peace Council to add to what we had collected 
at school.   Bullet casings littered the floor.   What are you 
doing in there PishoT my mother would shout.   My father and brothers were standing outside when a group of 
teenage Taliban went past playing victory songs on their mobiles.   His family became embroiled in a dispute with their cousins over 
a small plot of forest.   Around this time my mother also got tired of 
Fazlullah, especially when he began to preach against education and insist that those who went to 
school would also go to hell.   Afterwards Musa Khans body was found nearby.   Roads, crops and entire villages were washed away.   What is going on in your school? they demanded.   Every channel was showing footage of me with a commentary of prayers and moving poems as if I 
had died.   There were also giant posters pasted on the front of the mosque with the 
same accusations.   
Sahib, he told him, I have a cousin who is ten years older than me and you have certified him ten 
years younger.   

The most important part of the mock wedding was jewellery.   

Colonel Junaid examined me.   
She spent more than a year in jail before the case went to court and she was sentenced to death.   Islam does not allow democracy 
or elections.   I see my parents happy and laughing a lot.   We held an election for speaker and I won! It was strange to stand up there 
on the stage and have people address me as Madam Speaker, but it felt good to have our voices heard.   I couldnt control 
myself.   

It took a while for us to realise how bad it was.   .   

But none of those people had to live here.   
After, when they get power, they behave like the criminals they once hunted down 

Fazlullahs broadcasts were often aimed at women.   My father was in the school waiting and 



when he heard the news he came running.   The director of 
the CIA said Pakistan was either involved or incompetent.   But eventually Baba gave him a fine speech, which my father 
practised and practised.   Thats why I have problems with our Pashtunwali code.   

Dont worry replied my father.   She was the only girl in a 
class of boys.   So they decided to set up an Englishlanguage school in Mingora, thinking that 
since Swat was a tourist destination there would be a demand for learning in English.   My grandmother started 
crying and saying her life had never been so bad.   Sufi Mohammad didnt do what he should have done.   She said it needed to be 
checked all the time and asked a nurse why there was no arterial line.   She 
was relieved to see us and hugged us, tears streaming down her face.   The school where Uncle Khan dada taught 
was in the mountain village of Sewoor, about an hour and a half s climb from their house.   

We like conspiracy theories in Pakistan and we had many.   The army and their 
machine guns were everywhere.   Just after midnight someone 
knocked at their door.   

That winter it snowed and we built snow bears but without much joy.   

We continued to worry about my father.   She looked like I imagined Shashaka, the dirty woman they told us about in tales in the village 
to make us wash.   
Sometimes Fazlullah appeared galloping in on a black horse.   He did not 
believe in badal revenge and would try to make people see that neither side had anything to gain 
from continuing the violence, and it would be better for them to get on with their lives.   

When my father was offered a place for his A Levels at Jehanzeb College, which is the best further 
education institution in Swat, my grandfather refused to pay for his living expenses.   My own grandfather 
narrowly escaped death in the riots when his train was attacked by Hindus on his way home from 
Delhi, where he had been studying.   We live in a place where schools are blown up.   All those deadlines theyd given at the beginning when they said the next 
twentyfour hours were dangerous, fortyeight were crucial, seventytwo were critical had all 



passed without incident.   But there was so much water that 
the bridge across the dirty stream was submerged so we had to find another way.   All the private schools were in the same boat.   
Write your name as Ziauddin Shaheen, he told him.   He wanted tea all the time, our traditional tea with milk and sugar and cardamom, 
but even my mother tired of this and eventually made some so bitter that he lost the taste for it.   Our neighbours said the Taliban 
were instructing people to make it known to the mosque if their daughters were unmarried so they 
could be married off, probably to militants.   We were all horrified by the attack and 
people swore revenge.   He even asks his 
wife! they say as an insult.   You are playing havoc with our lives and our 
culture.   After that the boys stopped coming to our street, but one of 
the small boys who played with Atal would call out suggestively, How is Haroon? whenever I 
passed by.   It seemed to us that these bureaucrats came to our 
province simply to get rich, then went back home.   This involved the army bribing them to halt all attacks 
and keep out foreign fighters.   My father said the doctor 
was a charlatan and this was why we needed to keep struggling against ignorance.   There was no kitchen, no plumbing.   



O Ziauddin! What have they done? Madam Maryam burst through the doors.   It wasnt a good way to leave things.   His execution shocked everybody and made Pakistan look bad all around the world.   But when you banned girls 
education people spoke out.   

No one could understand how this had happened.   Three local men, Mukhtar Khan Yousafzai, 
Khurshid Kakajee and Zahid Khan went from /my ra to hujra persuading elders to join together.   

Islam came to our valley in the eleventh century when Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni invaded from 
Afghanistan and became our ruler, but in ancient times Swat was a Buddhist kingdom.   

It wasnt the first time.   
He also met the local army colonel, who said being in college in Abbottabad would not really be any 
safer and that as long as I kept a low profile we would be OK in Swat.   Id go outside and make sure the front gate was locked.   Just as it is our right to sing.   So our blood boiled over the Soviet invasion for both 
religious and nationalist reasons.   There were 
two families in our village he could not convince.   In my speech I told the audience 
that until I had watched the English play I had no idea there were so many talented people in Pakistan.   Inside I was lying on a trolley, a bandage 
over my head, my eyes closed, my hair spread out.   

Malalai was the daughter of a shepherd in Maiwand, a small town on the dusty plains west of 
Kandahar.   They have already blown 
up hundreds of schools and no one has done anything.   The CT scan shows the 
bullet went very close to the brain He said particles of bone had damaged the brain membrane.   Dont worry I told her.   Our American allies were furious.   It seemed like the Taliban didnt want us to do 
anything.   

When I woke again the next day I noticed I was in a strange green room with no windows and very 
bright lights.   The rest of Swat is OK.   And Excelsior is only coeducational in the primary section 

Muslim Khan didnt answer.   Just as Khattak had wanted the 
Pashtuns to unite against a foreign enemy, so we needed to unite against ignorance.   

I felt a terrible sinking feeling in my stomach.   
Fazlullah exploited this ignorance.   He took the tree, drew a line like a lollipop from his name and at the end of it 
he wrote, Malala.   My brothers and I thought of digging a tunnel.   It was built in 1965 and got its name from its red walls.   Musharraf then 
seized power and threw Sharif into a dungeon in Attack Fort.   They dont care if the army is actually flying the plane, they are happy to 
stay out of the cockpit and sit in business class, close the curtains and enjoy the fine food and service 
while the rest of us are squashed in economy.   Girls like me who still went to school he 
called buffaloes and sheep.   It was run by 
two brothers, Abdul Aziz and Abdul Rashid, and had become a centre for spreading propaganda 
about bin Laden whom Abdul Rashid had met in Kandahar when visiting Mullah Omar.   She still has lots to do.   We tend to remember years by events, like an 
earthquake.   The terrorists even blew up the ski lift and the big hotel in Malam 
Jabba where tourists used to stay.   

Within a few months my mother was expecting.   There were 
condolences in every mosque.   Its a kind of 
Romeo and Juliet story in which Gul Makai and Musa Khan meet at school and fall in love.   My father quickly got 
involved in student politics and became known as a talented speaker and debater.   

When our bus was called, we ran down the steps.   

There was little to do in my fathers village.   Did all this fighting mean we needed 
to divide our country yet again? 

When we left the museum some young men with flags were protesting outside.   She told my father she felt I 
would live but he could not see how.   She is a 
wise girl, though we often fall out, particularly when we go on school trips.   Instead he would tell his best 
students to keep their old books for my father at the end of the year and then he would be sent to their 
homes to get them.   

One day my father went to visit a friend in hospital and found lots of patients listening to cassettes 
of Fazlullahs sermons.   When 
the highest authority in your district joins the Taliban, then Talibanisation becomes normal.   Anyone reading them might think we won the three wars we have fought 
and lost against our great enemy India.   I meet my best friend 
Moniba and we sit together, talking and joking as if I had never left.   The wait felt endless.   We still had little 
money and my mother checked her purse to see what she had.   My father didnt understand what this meant.   

The Russian invasion transformed Zia from an international pariah to the great defender of freedom 
in the Cold War.   We breathed it into our lungs greedily.   There are men in the reception area of the school, and they see the girls enter, and this 
is very bad.   Foreigners call them 
suicide bridges but we loved them.   We must all work together for 
the rights of girls, I said.   He 
wished us to be independent, to be tolerant, to be kind to each other.   She replied that 
Christ had died on the cross for the sins of Christians and asked what the Prophet Mohammad had 
done for Muslims.   They were friends from the village.   My grandmother said, Benazir will 
become shaheed, meaning she would die an honourable death.   In the ones from the early days of Pakistan you 
could easily see from his thin sunken face that Jinnah was dying.   My fathers heart sank.   

My father consoled me by telling me about the mistakes great heroes made when they were 
children.   

It soon became clear that the Americans had been right in their assessment of the deal.   My father was always talking on his 
mobile so I loved to copy him and pretend to make calls on mine.   

In our society marriages are usually arranged by families, but theirs was a love match.  

Just in front of the school on Khushal Street, where I was born, was the house of a tall handsome 
mullah and his family.   And we were learning how powerful we are when we speak.   He didnt tell the Taliban to lay down their arms and 
leave the hujras.   The Americans said that bin Laden s deputy Ayman alZawahiri was 
hiding in Bajaur and had taken a wife there.   In these tough days we must be strong for 
our valley, he said.   After his 
visit no one else was allowed at my bedside because of the risk of infection.   She disapproves of dancing because she says God would not like it, but she loves to decorate 
herself with pretty things, embroidered clothes and golden necklaces and bangles.   You must go.   They were very 
involved in local politics, belonged to secular nationalist parties and were against involvement in the 
war.   It seemed like the whole world was outraged.   In the autumn chill winds would 
come.   

Their radio coverage spread across the valley and neighbouring districts.   Then he climbed up so he could catch hold of the star of 
Jupiter as a symbol of his power.   Our news bulletins were full of killings and death so it was natural for 
Atal to think of coffins and graves.   The 
operation took almost five hours.   I had never seen them so busy before.   One of the school clerks told my father that the mufti kept 
coming into school and demanding why we girls were still using the main entrance.   All the other girls in my class wanted to be 
doctors, but I decided I wanted to be an inventor and make an antiTaliban machine which would sniff 
them out and destroy their guns.   The letter had been buried on an inside page and the editor 
had published his name and the address of the school, which my father had not expected him to do.   He spoke to me in Urdu.   One girl felt my neck for a pulse.   I knew my mother was still mourning my aunt and they had been feeling uneasy 
about me receiving so many awards, but it seemed to be about more than that.   On 12 July which I remember 
because it was my birthday Fazlullah gave a radio address that was quite different to his previous 
ones.   When the sun hit a certain rock, we 
used to say our asr or afternoon prayers.   

Its very good, he said with a knowing smile.   Ziauddin is as clean as an egg with no hair, she said.   He is just fooling people.   He 
ordered Karachi airport to switch off its landing lights and to park fire engines on the runway to block 
the plane even though it had 200 other passengers on board and not enough fuel to get to another 
country.   My name had been put forward by Archbishop Desmond Tutu from South 
Africa.   Instead the only people knocking on our doors are beggars! This is a Herculean task, he added.   To this day I still havent got to try duck pancakes! 

Islamabad was totally different to Swat.   Police once tried to capture Fazlullah when he was speaking at a gathering, but a giant 
sandstorm blew up and he managed to escape.   Then 
she asked my father, Did you know, Ziauddin, that the Taliban have threatened this innocent girl? 
We didnt know what she was talking about so she went on the Internet and showed us that the 
Taliban had that day issued threats against two women Shad Begum, an activist in Dir, and me, 
Malala.   Was she not a 
woman and a good woman at that? 

No, said the mullah.   I ate a little bit of it then gave it to another girl to finish.   I stopped wearing my shawl over my head 
in some of the meetings, thinking I had become a modern girl.   

My father knew what he was referring to.   A hospital protected by the Taliban was not a good idea so he 
refused.   

The authorities turned a blind eye.   She begged him to give some cooked rice to the poor, as we believe that if you give 
rice, even ants and birds will eat the bits that drop to the floor and will pray for us.   One of the worst things about that period was when we started to 
doubt one another.   I had moved my arms.   

The only practice wed had was reading out poems at morning assembly, but there was an older 
girl at school called Fatima who was a very good speaker.   It was a peculiar 
system called wesh under which every five or ten years all the families would swap villages and 
redistribute the land of the new village among the men so that everyone had the chance to work on 
good as well as bad land.   Some thought my father had done it for 
me but Madam Maryam, our principal, told them, No.   And one of my friends, Sundus, had lost her father, who had 
been killed in an explosion.   He told me she kept a diary 
about their lives all cramped together, about how they spent their days and about her own feelings.   Let them be illiterate.   The name was ironic and my father often 
laughed about it, but the organisations aim was serious: to preserve the environment of Swat and 
promote peace and education among local people.   The holy man was called 
Lewano Pir, Saint of the Mad, because he was said to be able to calm lunatics.   I was sitting on the left between Moniba and a 
girl from the year below called Shazia Ramzan, holding our exam folders to our chests and our school 
bags under our feet.   But fear is very powerful 
and in the end it was this fear that had made people turn against Shabana.   Bush and to 10 Downing Street by 
Tony Blair.   Dont 
help me, brother, as this will bring immense pleasure to Fazlullah.   

He suggested sending me to boarding school in Abbottabad like Khushal, but I didnt want to go.   
If it was anything serious they would have to make the long bus journey to Mingora unless they were 
lucky enough to know someone with a car.   He held a big meeting in Malakand, where our ancestors had fought the 
British.   Overlooking 
the river were tourist restaurants with big glass windows we had never been to.   My fathers cousin Jehan Sher Khan 
Yousafzai was one of the few who came to celebrate my birth and even gave a handsome gift of 
money.   Not a single day passes without the killing of at least one Pakistani.   The groups main objective 
was to liberate Kashmirs Muslims from Indian rule, but they had recently also become active in 
Afghanistan.   Sit inside, Atal Khan, or 
I wont take you! he said.   

Shortly afterwards the mufti went to the woman who owned the school premises and said, 
Ziauddin is running a haram school in your building and bringing shame on the mohalla 
[neighbourhood].   My father and 
I went to Peshawar and visited lots of places to tell people what was happening.   While boys and men could roam freely about town, my mother and I could not go 
out without a male relative to accompany us, even if it was a fiveyearold boy! This was the 
tradition.   People 
often call Swat the Switzerland of the East we even had Pakistans first ski resort.   We had been away from our valley for almost three months and as 
we drove back past 

Churchills Picket, past the ancient ruins on the hill and the giant Buddhist stupa, we saw the wide 
Swat River and my father began to weep.   Those from my class were me, Moniba, MalkaeNoor, 
Rida, Karishma and Sundus, and we were chaperoned by my mother and Madam Maryam 

We left for the capital on Independence Day, 14 August, and travelled by bus, everyone brimming 
with excitement.   

But the expression on the mans face was mocking.   I felt so sad.   She had not been at 
school that day but at home nursing her baby when she received a phone call from her brotherinlaw 
checking she was safe.   I will be prime minister and 
she will be my secretary.   We just 
knew my father didnt want us there, said my father.   

Our area had always been more conservative than most of the rest of Pakistan.   There cannot be two 



kings in one land.   They 
slaughter goats and eat with pleasure.   

The other main student organisation was Islami JamaateTalaba, the student wing of the religious 
party JamaateIslami, which was powerful in many universities in Pakistan.   Some newspapers printed extracts.   Muslims 
widely considered it blasphemous and it provoked so much outrage that it seemed people were 
talking of little else.   I wanted to go to Shangla with my father and the trucks but 
he told me it would be too dangerous.   It was such a 
small discount that most teachers did not bother, but he forced my father to apply for the rebate.   He was recognised by the British as the head of state in 1926 and 
installed as wali, which is our word for ruler.   Even as 
a toddler you talked like a politician, he teased.   But 
Alexander was a determined and patient leader.   

I didnt see the two young men step out into the road and bring the van to a sudden halt.   Look at her, he told Adam Ellick.   
Muslim Khan, the Taliban spokesman, was on the phone.   

In truth, lots of people in Pashtun areas live in walled compounds because of purdah and privacy, 
so the house wasnt really unusual.   I didnt agree.   And now it was all to stop.   Our history textbooks were rewritten to describe Pakistan as a 
fortress of Islam, which made it seem as if we had existed far longer than since 1947, and 
denounced Hindus and Jews.   Every time we 
felt a tremor we thought it was the Day of Judgement.   A 
teenage girl wearing a black burqa and red trousers was lying face down on the ground being flogged 
in broad daylight by a bearded man in a black turban.   Finally my father was 
called forward.   We drove to Islamabads twin city of Rawalpindi to see him in his 



office.   My relatives would ask me, Would you like to cook chicken for us? and Id 
say, No, the chicken is innocent.   What 
would Muslim Khan use instead of the stethoscope and the thermometer? my father asked.   The mohajirs almost all support a party called the MQM led by 
Altaf Hussain, who lives in exile in London and communicates with his people by Skype.   I close my eyes 
and for a moment I am back in my valley the high snowtopped mountains, green waving fields 
and fresh blue rivers and my heart smiles when it looks at the people of Swat.   A while later we heard that 
she had two children.   People were desperately worried that the Taliban would 
take advantage of the chaos and return to the valley.   We should learn everything and then choose which path to 
follow.   Sometimes his men would display the fancy clothes that they said they had taken from 
decadent women to shame them.   

But they did not drive the Taliban away.   The women would not be attacked if they went to the markets, 
but the Taliban would shout at them and threaten them until they stayed at home.   When Irfan and a 
cameraman arrived in Mingora, our uncle, who was staying with us, said over and over that it was too 
risky to have cameras in our house.   You will not find a single 
child to drink a drop of the vaccine anywhere in Swat.   Pashtuns cannot stand anyone belittling them, nor was he about to pay a 
bribe for something he was entitled to.   Our favourite game was weddings.   

My grandmother was so worried about my fathers stutter that when he was still a young boy she 
took him to see a holy man.   If we dont, she may die.   As ever, 
they ignored me and carried on with their war games.   The army had wanted to imprison him, but the intelligence service had prevailed and taken him 
to Bajaur so that he could slip across the border to Afghanistan.   Her hair was matted and her skin was covered in 
sores.   But when they 
came round in October 2012 I felt under pressure.   One of the fruit pickers reported her to the local imam, who informed the police.   Her name 
means Queen of Light and she said she wanted to be Pakistans first female army chief.   Are you trying to bring shame on us that we cant 
afford to buy such things? 

Its not true! I lied.   We said it was the worst lunch ever.   I thought, One day I will be a politician and do these things myself.   We had played together as children and later he told me he was in love with me.   Moniba spoke well she was very 
composed and her speech was more emotional and poetic than mine, though mine might have had the 
better message.   He taught theology in the government high school in 
the village of Shahpur.   

I grunted.   At dusk my father and his friends 
often gathered to sit and drink tea there.   

When we got the topic, I couldnt believe my eyes.   
The Taliban spokesman Muslim Khan then confirmed they had agreed an indefinite ceasefire.   
Thats why they volunteered their young men.   This is a very peaceful building of white marble 
and somehow seemed separate from the hustle and bustle of the city.   He 
had been living in a large walled compound less than a mile from our military academy.   More than three years had passed since the 
military operation to drive the Taliban out of Swat had begun.   Its very hard on them.   Nawaz 
Sharif was so worried about his reaction that he tried to stop the plane from landing in Pakistan.   One of 
the most vocal people against me was a female MP called Dr Raheela Qazi from the religious 
JamaateIslami party.  m.   

It was nightfall by the time we reached Besham as many roads were blocked.   

No one I knew had been to Islamabad.   Our 
biggest intelligence service belongs to the military and is called the ISI.   

There was one big problem.   We 
heard they were dropping hundreds of commandos from helicopters into the mountains in the north.   
She became a messenger for my parents, not only a doctor.   I wanted to see pictures of the women in his life.   Some believed the authorities were 
deliberately encouraging the Taliban.   We cant disown our 
campaign! 

People were asking me to speak at events.   

Now, every morning when I open my eyes, I long to see my old room full of my things, my clothes 
all over the floor and my school prizes on the shelves.   Attiya 
used to tease me by saying, Taliban is good, army not good.   One was Sher Zaman, a man who had been in my fathers 
class and always got better grades than him.   He was told there was a problem arranging their 
passports and that for security reasons he should not even tell the rest of my family he was going.   At least I didnt have to wear one.   The temples are 
long gone, but almost anywhere you go in Swat, amid all the primroses and other wild flowers, you 
find their remains.   

My father then signed an in loco parentis document making Dr Fiona my guardian for the trip to 
the UK.   In the bazaar you could buy posters 
of him on a white horse and boxes of sweets with his picture on them.   

There was a huge crowd between 30,000 and 40,000 people wearing turbans and singing 
Taliban and jihadi songs.   .   But God has also given us 
the power to forget, so that when the tragedy is over we carry on as normal.   In the winter 
when parents didnt want their children to stay outside in the snow they would tell the story about the 
lion or tiger which must always make the first step in the snow.   

We usually stayed in Barkana at my grandfathers house, where my father grew up.   In my fathers small village eight people had been killed and 
many homes destroyed.   She was always very careful about 
interactions with boys because her brothers watched everything.   

In 1949, two years after the creation of Pakistan, he abdicated in favour of his elder son Miangul 
Abdul Haq Jehanzeb.   Zahid Khan 
was bleeding so much it was as if his white beard was bathed in red.   

For most Pashtuns its a gloomy day when a daughter is born.   How could he have lived so close to the 
capital just sixty miles away? And for so long! Maybe the best place to hide is in plain sight, but he 
had been living in that house since the 2005 earthquake.   

Occasionally there would be real weddings with big feasts which went on for days and left the 
family bankrupt or in debt.   

Then I was in class one day when my classmates said, You have won a big prize and half a 
million rupees! My father told me the government had awarded me Pakistans first ever National 
Peace Prize.   

The same one youre using, she replied.   Please stop it! she begged in Pashto in 
between screams and whimpers as each blow was delivered.   He even told people how they 
should wash their private parts.   

People liked to hear him talk, and I loved the evenings when guests visited.   I was to be flown out of Pakistan for the first time in my life in the early hours 
of Monday, 15 October.   He couldnt bear the thought of being killed in 
front of us.   Most of the shops had 
heavy metal shutters; those that didnt had been looted.   Swat seemed to be under complete military control.   He had studied in a 
British school in Peshawar, and perhaps because his own father was illiterate he was passionate 
about schools and built many, as well as hospitals and roads.   We dont respect 
privacy and there is no such thing as making an appointment to see someone.   Sometimes I was very 
afraid but I said nothing, and it didnt mean I would stop going to school.   I was restless and kept trying to get the monitor off my finger.   

Its the same with stealing.   .   She had seen the New York Times documentary Class 
Dismissed in Swat Valley and tracked us down.   He palpated my spine and located the bullet lying next to my left shoulder blade.   The militants simply used the cash to buy more weapons and resumed 
their activities.   

My brothers immediately rushed off to check on their pet chickens.   They wanted my fathers help.   Two more schools were 
blown up and three foreign aid workers from a Christian group were kidnapped as they returned to 
their base in Mingora and then murdered.   The chief minister of KPK was the first person who called.   But 
I think that if someone kills your brother, you shouldnt kill them or their brother, you should teach 
them instead.   

I also wrote about the burqa.   The Pakistani newspaper 
Dawn wrote in an editorial that the deal sent a disastrous signal fight the state militarily and it will 
give you what you want and get nothing in return .   The news showed shocking pictures of the wreckage, everywhere blood and 
broken glass, and dead bodies.   The other girls stirred things up, what we call putting masala on the situation.   Baba had beautiful handwriting 
and my father would spend hours painstakingly drawing letters but Baba never once praised him.   I had developed something 
called disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), which meant my blood was not clotting, my 
blood pressure was very low and my blood acid had risen.   My father would get angry sometimes he 
would arrive home at lunchtime and call out, Tor Pekai, Im home! only to find she was out and 
there was no lunch for him Then he would find she was at the hospital visiting someone who was ill, 
or had gone to help a family, so he could not stay cross.   Then she had beaten me by not just one or two marks, the usual difference 
between us, but by five marks! I had been taking extra lessons with Sir Amjad who ran the boys 



school.   

My cousins made fun of me for my city ways.   In our country, where the army has seized power so many times, people are often 
wary of the military, particularly those from Swat, where the army had taken so long to act against the 
Taliban.   
Since weve come back from being IDPs we havent seen any attacks on army and police.   The most visible of all was JamaatulDawa (JuD), the welfare wing of Lashkare 
Taiba.   

The army was in shock.   Maryams family was not happy 
about this as she was still nursing her baby boy, who had recently undergone a small operation.   What we didnt know then was that bin Laden came to 
Swat and stayed in a remote village for a year, taking advantage of the Pashtunwali hospitality code.   

Then we went into the classrooms.   

Still, it was with a heavy heart that we returned to Swat.   

I wasnt scared but I had started making sure the gate was locked at night and asking God what 
happens when you die.   He tried desperately not to think about the treacherous consonants lying 
ahead of him, just waiting to trip him up and stick in his throat, but when he spoke, the words came 
out fluently like beautiful butterflies taking flight.   

His own village school had been just a small building.   

In some ways the army did not seem very different to the militants.   And schools were expected to treat officials regularly to a good lunch of chicken or trout from 
the river.   Or the day our kindergarten teacher Miss Ulfat told 
him I had written, Only Speak in Urdu, on the blackboard for my classmates at the start of an Urdu 
lesson so we would learn the language faster.   Even my name.   When he was a child he thought this small valley 
was the entire world and that if anyone went beyond the point where either mountain kissed the sky, 
they would fall off.   The 
BBC even made a recording of it using another girls voice, and I began to see that the pen and the 
words that come from it can be much more powerful than machine guns, tanks or helicopters.   The Pakistan army had far more men and heavy weapons so they 
quickly managed to recapture the valley.   

They killed Shabana on a bitterly cold night in January 2009.   A few weeks later, on 8 October 2007, they tried again.   If the Taliban find out youre giving water in the month 
of Ramadan they will bomb us ! 

My father replied that people would die either of thirst or bombings.   He was said to be more moderate than his soninlaw Fazlullah, and there was hope that he 
would make a peace deal with the government to impose sharia law in Swat and release us from 
Taliban violence.   

This is typical, he said.   It was always a race between us and the birds to get to them.   He ended by asking in a thundering voice my grandfather would have 
been proud of, Is Islam such a weak religion that it cannot tolerate a book written against it? Not my 
Islam! 



For the first few years after graduating from Jehanzeb my father worked as an English teacher in a 
wellknown private college.   Pakistan doesnt have student loans and he had never even set foot in a bank.   

One of their most heated debates in that first year was over a novel.   
They hung him and then they shot his father.   Her eyes would not meet mine.   Within an hour of the announcement on television of Musharraf s sacking, tanks were on the 
streets and troops had taken over the newsrooms and the airports.   

This family rivalry meant that my father was bullied a lot by his cousins.   



My fathers friend Ahmad Shah called it a controlled peace, not a durable peace.   People will just imagine something 
terrible went on.   The two brothers and one of bin Laden s grownup sons had 
also been killed, but bin Ladens wives and other children had been tied up and left behind and were 
then taken into Pakistani custody.   But my country is centuries 
behind this one.   He said we should continue to 
speak out.   Shortly after that I found the perfect way to 



try to win back the respect of my father.   The ISI chief 
asked the Americans to hold off their attack on Afghanistan until he had gone to Kandahar to ask the 
Taliban leader Mullah Omar to hand over bin Laden; instead he offered the Taliban help.   Swat became part of Pakistan 
in 1969, the year my father was born.   Others said that the flogging had taken place in 
January, before the peace deal, and had been released now to sabotage it.   The rich people 
of Pakistan came on holiday to enjoy our clean air and scenery and our Sufi festivals of music and 
dancing.   But now Im neither a widow nor a wife.   If there were eggs, they would only be for the 



boys.   My mother was very confused by all the different stories, first that my foot had been injured, 
then that I had been shot in the head.   Because we were cut off from supply routes, what little food was available was 
extremely expensive.   Shiza had laughed and said he wouldnt be able to answer so many.   

Go wherever you want, he told my mother and cousin.   What are you doing? he would ask.   
Two planes had flown into it.   

Hai Kakar told me it could be dangerous to use my real name and gave me the pseudonym Gul 
Makai, which means cornflower and is the name of the heroine in a Pashtun folk story.   Then the colonel called my father into his office, where he had 
the scans up on a screen.   She is a very traditional woman and this is our centuriesold culture.   Then we played 
mango mango, where you make a circle and sing, then when the song stops everyone has to freeze.   Ziauddin, you have charisma; you can speak up and 
organise against them, he said.   I was born on 12 July 1997.   There 
was even a headmaster from Shangla who would boast that his greatest success was to send ten boys 
in Grade 9 for jihad training in Kashmir.   Our own intelligence service, ISI, had virtually 
created the Taliban.   

The school had expanded a lot by then and had three buildings the original one in Landikas was a 
primary school, and then there was a high school for girls on Yahya Street and one for boys with a big 
garden of roses near the remains of the Buddhist temple.   In the morning 
the sun reflected off the top of Tor Ghar; when we got up for the fajr prayers, the first of our five 
daily prayers, we would look left and see the golden peak of Spin Ghar lit with the first rays of the 
sun like a white lady wearing a jumar tika a gold chain on her forehead.   That was tough and dangerous work, and the coffins of 
those killed in accidents would come back several times a year.   Hospitality is an important part of Pashtun culture.   As we headed south the 
land became more parched.   Dr Javid said it was like flying an aircraft you can only do it using the right 
instruments, and even if the hospital had them they werent being used properly.   

One night we all went for dinner at the house of my fathers friend Dr Afzal, who runs a hospital.   

Dr Javid, who was there when I was brought round, says he will never forget the look of fear and 
bewilderment on my face.   Even we schoolchildren know that 
ordinary diplomats dont drive around in unmarked cars carrying Glock pistols.   

Yes, I was just saying there is a fear in my heart, I replied.   

At night our fear is strong, Jani, he told me, but in the morning, in the light, we find our courage 
again.   

As the khushal School started to attract more pupils, we moved again and finally had a television.   They are sitting in their bunkers on top of the hills.   Helicopters were a rare sight in 
Swat, but since our house was close to the local army headquarters they sometimes flew right over us.   One day I want to cross 
this sea, I said.   
You run the haram school, he said.   They provided free 
textbooks and grants to students but held deeply intolerant views and their favourite pastime was to 
patrol universities and sabotage music concerts.   Its just I so wanted a new book, 
unmarked by another student and bought with my father s money.   This school is a centre of vulgarity and obscenity and they take girls for picnics to different 
resorts.   After the operation, first we will have recovery, then 
rehabilitation, then hold and transfer to civil authorities.   Pakistan took its place.   It 
was an astonishing example of Pashtun hospitality.   It was thought this would then keep rival clans from fighting.   The leader of LeT is a fiery professor 
from Lahore called Hafiz Saeed, who is often on television calling on people to attack India.   If shed died I would have killed Pakistans 
Mother Teresa.   There would be bowls of chicken, rice, local spinach and spicy mutton, all cooked over the fire 
by the women, followed by plates of crunchy apples, slices of yellow cake and a big kettle of milky 
tea.   

We couldnt see in front, but a young bearded man in lightcoloured clothes had stepped into the 
road and waved the van down.   She was then furious when she learned that my father did not get a good 
price for them.   The road left the river and wound 
up through narrow passes over steep firclad heights, higher and higher, until our ears popped.   I have a father who isn t scared, who stands by me.   If you do not fall in the battle of Maiwand then, by God, someone is 
saving you as a symbol of shame.   He had always believed that if the Taliban came for anyone, it would be for him, not me.   I was in my cousins car, and as we drove 
through a river where the road had been washed away we had to stop at a Taliban checkpoint.   Marriage is part of life, we said.   

Next Fazlullah began holding a shura, a kind of local court.   Then we were on the main road built by the last wali, which follows 
the wide Swat River on the left and hugs the cliffs to the right with their emerald mines.   They had ended up 
in an argument, and of course just as in our arguments at school there were different versions of who 
said what.   The year before I was born a group called the Taliban led by a oneeyed mullah had 
taken over the country and was burning girls schools.   Thankfully, our supreme court stopped this.   The Muttahida Majlis eAmal (MMA) alliance was 
a group of five religious parties including the Jamiat UlemaeIslam (JUI), which ran the madrasas 
where the Taliban were trained.   We learned that the first wife of the Prophet was a 
businesswoman called Khadijah.   Once the 
resolutions were agreed, they were sent to officials and a handful were even acted on.   Then he wrote up my words and once a week they 
would appear on the BBC Urdu website.   They convinced themselves that the shariat in Swat would be 
different to the Afghan version we would still have our girls schools and there would be no 
morality police.   

One day I saw my little brother Atal digging furiously in the garden.   Ten members of Monibas family were there and 
were either killed or injured.   

Atal had been told by my mother to ride on the bus with me, so he walked over from the primary 
school.   I knew that any of the girls in my class could 
have achieved what I had achieved if they had had their parents support.   

But I thought the bullet hadnt entered her brain, said my father.   They take out loans from state banks but they dont pay them back.   She thought I would think it strange that she hadnt come to me, 
but people told her not to go as I was either dead or about to be moved.   He told her the news with a heavy heart.   Dont go 
that way, he urged.   After about ten 
minutes of this he realised from my facial expressions that I could understand him perfectly.   She really wanted to please her parents, particularly her mother.   Like all our dictators, he started by addressing the nation 
on TY, beginning, Mere aziz hamwatano  My dear countrymen then went into a long tirade 
against Sharif, saying that under him Pakistan had lost our honour, dignity and respect.   My father and his friends were disgusted.   For us a turban is a public 
symbol of chivalry and Pashtunness, and for a man to lose his turban is considered a great humili 
ation.   There was no way they 
could pay this so my father asked one of his political friends to use his influence.   Instead he just called himself 
Ziauddin Yousafzai, our clan name.   The MQM 
is a very organised movement, and the mohajir community sticks together.   If one man, Fazlullah, can destroy everything, why 
can t one girl change it? I wondered.   
Sometimes I could hardly see over the lectern.   

That is wrong! said the maulana.   All the men there carry weapons and hundreds of 
soldiers were killed when the locals revolted.   I cant leave my wife and sons alone here.   He 
went outside, shouting Ziauddin, Ziauddin! The search almost cost Hidayatullah his life.   He brought logs back from the mountains for firewood, and after 
teaching he would work in the fields where our family had a few buffaloes.   Are you Malalas father? Once again my fathers heart sank.   Foreign aid agencies were also worried about the safety of their staff after a Taliban 
spokesperson demanded that the Pakistan government reject help from Christians and Jews.   He was not a good speaker.   We Yousafzai (which some people spell Yusufzai or Yousufzai) are 
originally from Kandahar and are one of the biggest Pashtun tribes, spread across Pakistan and 
Afghanistan.   

I had done a lot of television interviews and enjoyed speaking into the microphone so much that my 
friends would tease me.   Hed say, Mr Soandso was smoking chars but has stopped because its sinful, 
or, Mr X has kept his beard and I congratulate him, or, Mr Y voluntarily closed down his CD 
shop.   In our culture women are 
expected not to mix with men they are not related to.   

My friends and I couldnt understand why it was so wrong.   By nightfall on 10 July, when 
the siege was finally over, around a hundred people had been killed including several soldiers and a 
number of children.   Before we had even started, 



intelligence agents came and asked, What are you doing? Who brought these outfits? 

On 12 July I turned fourteen, which in Islam means you are an adult.   Her grandmother my 
great grandmother was widowed when her children were young, and her eldest son Janser Khan 
was locked up because of a tribal feud with another family when he was only nine.   She would sit with them patiently and 
would then ask my father to explain every detail to my mother.   

Adam could not come to Swat because it was too dangerous for foreigners.   My parents say I have 
qualities of both grandfathers humorous and wise like my mothers father and vocal like my fathers 
father! Baba had grown soft and whitebearded in his old age and I loved going to visit him in the 
village.   Two of his children were even born in the 
Abbottabad hospital.   

I had the run of the school as my playground.   Three Bullets 



Sir de pa lowara tega kegda 

Praday watan de paki nishta balakhtona 

O Wayfarer! Rest your head on the stony cobblestone 
It is a foreign land not the city of your kings! 



16 

The Valley of Sorrows 



It all seemed like a bad dream.   I could 
see in his eyes that I had failed him I wanted him to be proud of me, like he was when I was 
presented with the first inyear trophies at school.   Usually I liked exams as a chance to show what I could do.   My father returned to the village every two or three weeks to see her.   

Spit it out, son! hed roar whenever my father got stuck in the middle of a sentence.   This showed that my brain was swelling dangerously.   I read a poem 
about working hard to achieve your hearts desires.   The army had destroyed his headquarters in Imam Deri and 
then claimed to have him surrounded in the mountains of Peochar.   Teachers helped us beforehand on how to respond to 
questions.   Never in history have Khushal and Malala been friends.   His name was Musa Khan Khel, and he had 
often interviewed my father.   At 3 p.   

We were all at risk from a Taliban attack.   There were live 
electric cables hanging loose and swaying in the wind.  m or you will be next On 
some of the nights of the killings there would also be earthquakes, which made people even more 
scared as we connect every natural disaster with a human disaster.   The 
Afghans were so proud that the last Afghan king built a Maiwand victory monument in the centre of 
Kabul.   

If you look at a map of Swat youll see it is one long valley with little valleys we call darae off to the 
sides like the branches of a tree.   He was the nephew of my fathers friend Zahid Khan, the hotel 
owner who had been attacked in 2009.   About a week after the battle 
of Swat, forty Taliban leaders from across our province met in South Waziristan to declare war on 
Pakistan.   I wore my 
scarf over my head but never over my face.   

Moniba and I liked to sit near the open back so we could see out.   When Sufi 
Mohammad was imprisoned in a roundup of militant leaders in 2002, Fazlullah had taken over the 
movements leadership.   Hundreds of CD and DVD shops closed voluntarily and their owners were 
paid compensation by the Taliban.   Be natural, Irfan told me.   I wrote a sketch based on Romeo 
and Juliet about corruption.   He was 
offered an escort by some fellow political activists but he thought that it would be too late to go if he 
waited for them.   They are taking salaries and have to serve 
you.   

It seemed like everyone knew I had written the BBC diary.   

Muslim Khan said that Sangota was a convent school teaching Christianity and that Excelsior was 
coeducational, teaching girls and boys together.   As we always did, we called to each other to make sure we 
were all safe.   The Americans also 
sent helicopters, which made some people suspicious.   
Until then it had seemed as if the rest of Pakistan was ignoring what was happening in Swat.   But I never listened to my interviews.   Luckily, a neighbour called Mr Amanuddin took them in 
for the night.   His 
sermons at Friday prayers were so popular that people would come down from the mountains by 
donkey or on foot to hear him.   We saw women in the 
streets without purdah, their heads completely uncovered.   Then he 
asked if he could talk to me and began asking questions using Irfan as an interpreter.   Teach him it 
is far more honourable to fail than to cheat.   There is a suicide bomber over there! Wed promised to meet the peace 
walker, so we went by a different route, placed a garland round his neck, then left quickly for home.   Nobody remembered.   

My friends at school said their mothers listened to the Radio Mullah although our headmistress 
Madam Maryam told us not to.   They had parachuted in 
soldiers and there had been handtohand fighting in the streets.   But now we were living our own drama.   Underneath were the rotting heads of goats.   First a brother on one side would attack an uncle on the other.   They thought it was toxic, especially at 
times like this.   A famous poem was written at that time by Rahmat Shah Sayel, the same Peshawar poet who 
wrote the poem about my namesake.   He appointed the first 
woman governor of the state bank and the first women airline pilots and coastguards.   We called them chaqwartee.   Why are you like this? 
I asked.   ISI is a huge organisation with agents everywhere.   At one point we were stopped by the army, who told us we could go no further 
and must turn back.   

It was after the Red Mosque siege that the Swat Taliban changed.   Sometimes 
he would say, Men, go outside now.   I am told it is the height of luxury with a plush double bed, sixteen firstclass seats 
and a minihospital at the back staffed with European nurses led by a German doctor.   

The other principals took paying bribes for granted, but my father argued that if all the schools 
joined together they could resist.   When he left the room Maryam switched it back 
on.   

After what happened with Safina, I vowed that I would never treat a friend badly again.   

The way bin Laden was found was like something out of the spy movies my brother Khushal likes.   He used his wifes phone to protect us as he said his own phone 
was bugged by the intelligence services.   His voice did not boom like his fathers, but his 
passion shone through and as he went on he gained confidence.   It blamed citizens like us for allowing the 
Taliban to control Swat.   We had no clean water and no 
electricity.   It was easy.   

My parents had no idea of any of these negotiations though they knew discussions were under way 
to move me overseas.   A crowd had gathered but did nothing.   Once we got over the other side and down into the valley it seemed there were army 
checkpoints everywhere and soldiers had made nests for their machine guns on so many of the 
rooftops.   I was a girl in a land where 
rifles are fired in celebration of a son, while daughters are hidden away behind a curtain, their role in 
life simply to prepare food and give birth to children.   

We were lucky our house had not been broken into.   

My father tried not to think about the past and whether he had been wrong to encourage me to speak 
out and campaign.   The soldiers had made a hole in the wall through 
which you could see the city below.   A group of us girls 
gave an interview on ATV Khyber, the only privately owned Pashto television channel, about girls 
dropping out of school due to militancy.   I was lying on Monibas lap, bleeding from my head 
and left ear.   

The helipad was just a mile from our house and all the women rushed up to the roof.   

We always went to the village for the Eid holidays.   They wanted to move me but suggested that in the 
meantime a top doctor be brought in.   My mother was worried about me, but the Taliban had never come for a girl and I was more 
concerned they would target my father as he was always speaking out against them His close friend 
and fellow campaigner Zahid Khan had been shot in the face in August on his way to prayers and I 
knew everyone was telling my father, Take care, youll be next.   We 
saw pictures on the news of what people were calling the Burqa Brigade young women and girls 
like us in burqas with sticks, attacking CD and DVD shops in bazaars in the centre of Islamabad.   Even if she is injured, just let her survive.   My fathers voice is so loud my mother often jokes that he doesnt need to make phone 
calls, he can just shout.   Some people even laughed, including a local political leader sitting in the 
front row.   
Anyone who sides with the government against us will die at our hands, he said.   

We heard about Shabanas death the next morning.   At that time my father was only twelve years old and too young to fight.   

We too were proud, but his higher profile meant we didnt see him very much.   I will kill him.   

The next day he went on a live show on the Voice of America and angrily condemned the attacks.   

My father was again busy speaking at seminars on our troubles with the Taliban.   Environmentalists had warned that our mountains had been stripped of 
trees by the Taliban and timber smugglers.   I wondered what I would do.   He had asked the doctors to brief him on their progress before flying home, 
which happened to be the morning after I had been shot.   Were not going to operate at this stage.   Thats how it stayed 
from then on.   Now she lives in New York.   

When nightfall came, there were still tremors and my mother was in a state of panic.   

Finally we made it up onto Sky Turn, the gateway to Shangla Top, a mountain pass which feels as if 
its on top of the world.   My father said 
people had been seduced by Fazlullah.   Of course this only applied to the men; women in 
our area dont vote.   But now I had two other girls in the 
room I want space! Id cry.   At first stealing gave 
me a thrill, but that did not last long.   Hidden among them was Abdul Aziz, disguised in 
a burqa, along with his daughter.   My 
father was at the Swat Press Club for a meeting of the Association of Private Schools and had just 
gone on stage to give a speech when his mobile rang.   

On 17 June 2004 an unmanned Predator dropped a Hellfire missile on Nek Mohammad in South 
Waziristan apparently while he was giving an interview by satellite phone.   The Swat museum moved its 
collection away for safekeeing.   

I liked doing my hair in different styles and would spend ages in the bathroom in front of the mirror 
trying out looks I had seen in movies.   

We were in school when the floods started and were sent home.   Another lady told me 
her son was missing.   Eid happens twice a year Eid ulFitr or Small Eid marks 
the end of the Ramadan fasting month, and Eid ulAzha or Big Eid commemorates the Prophet 
Abrahams readiness to sacrifice his son Ismail to God.   My father said we common people were like chaff caught 
between the two stones of a water mill.   That summer, while he was 
walking in the mountains, our dictator General Zia was killed in a mysterious plane crash, which 
many people said was caused by a bomb hidden in a crate of mangoes.   We 
did another paper at school to see who would get the prize and again we got equal marks.   But I tried to be obedient and 
polite, always saying, Yes, sir.   

People used to talk about Shabanas bad character, but our men both wished to see her dance and 
also despised her because she was a dancer.   He had thought we were 
done with military dictatorships.   The anger wasnt just in Pakistan.   Atal had a tantrum and refused so he walked home in a huff with some of 
his friends.   And we saw the 
sights.   No one would venture 
from their homes after sunset.   Women had been kept in purdah, schools and bridges had been blown up, businesses had 
closed.   We knew this would not be the end, but my father 
argued that if we had shariat the Taliban would have nothing more to fight for.   With my birthday came the news 
that the Taliban had killed the owner of the Swat Continental Hotel, who was on a peace committee.   That day Usman Bhai Jan had had enough and refused to let him.   

The army action at the end of 2007 had not got rid of the Taliban.   

They called it Operation Silence although it was very loud.   
Once there, all they do is keep the children quiet with a long stick as they cannot imagine education 
will be any use to them.   

I was speaking at a lot of events but because I was so short it wasnt easy to be authoritative.   This verse was recited by the prophet 
Yunus when he was in the tummy of the whale.   

My mother and father tell each other everything so Aba soon found out why I was so sad.   

We Pashtuns are split between Pakistan and Afghanistan and dont really recognise the border that 
the British drew more than 100 years ago.   Afterwards he said that had he known Jinnah was dying he would have delayed and 
there would have been no Pakistan.   In my grandfathers Friday addresses he would talk about the poor and the 
landowners and how true Islam is against feudalism.   My father had felt so 
uncomfortable and scared because of the secrecy of all the arrangements, the men in uniform 
everywhere and the vulnerability of our family, that he had panicked and blown the incident out of 
proportion.   When Moniba spoke she couldnt control her tears.   
Then he asked, Please, can you bring in Dr Mumtaz? 

How would that look? replied Colonel Junaid who was, not surprisingly, offended.   But also give him quiet time to ponder the eternal 
mystery of birds in the sky, bees in the sun, and the flowers on a green hillside, it says.   How did they get there? If you have so much information, why cant 
you catch them? 

His reply went on for about ten to fifteen minutes and I couldnt work out what his answer was! 
Then I asked about reconstruction.   Fazlullah closed beauty parlours and banned shaving so 
there was no work for barbers.   His advice was 
to appeal to God and that He would answer our prayers.   They learn that there is no such thing as science or literature, that 
dinosaurs never existed and that man never went to the moon.   But we werent exactly cooperating as the ISI was still 
arming Taliban fighters and giving their leaders sanctuary in Quetta.   

I would get very depressed and sometimes collapse seeing the problems all around us, said 
Hidayatullah, but when Ziauddin is in a crisis he becomes strong and his spirits high.   We all call her Bhabi now.   

When he returned a few days later he was ashen.   I wasnt the only one to be interviewed.   Even 
some of the dancers of Banr Bazaar had moved back, although they were mostly making DVDs to sell, 



rather than performing live.   In return he would drop corruption 
charges against her and her husband and agree to hold elections, which everyone assumed would 
result in Benazir becoming prime minister.   He was an 
extremely disciplined man and could not understand why they were not the same.   She had been married off as soon as 
she entered puberty.   I am sorry but I cant help you.   General Zia was invited to meet 
President Ronald Reagan at the White House and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher at 10 Downing 
Street.   We had only gone a short way when a policeman stopped the van and started asking 
questions, wasting precious time.   It was the peach and onion season and farmers were desperate to save their 
harvests.   The girl had a big sack and was sorting rubbish into piles, one for cans, one for 
bottle tops, another for glass and another for paper.   Im not against you personally, I just 
want every girl to go to school.   It was a long slow journey and we were all very sweaty 
crammed in together.   Can 
you help to get him off our backs? 

Im afraid I cant help you, Ziauddin, he replied.   I found it particularly hard in the 
afternoon, when I didnt want to be dragged away from the TV At exam time I prayed to Allah for 
high marks though our teachers used to warn us, God wont give you marks if you dont work hard.   Why are you afraid? he asked.   Meanwhile time was ticking away.   My father also saw the book as offensive to Islam 
but believes strongly in freedom of speech.   Our people are being killed, but this 
Ziauddin is so outspoken and hes still alive! He must be a secret agent! Actually he had been 
threatened too but hadnt told us.   He was going to Besham, from where we would need 
another lift to take us to Shangla.   It was as though they wanted to remove all traces of womankind 
from public life.   

My father argued that all he had ever wanted was to create a school in which children could learn.   

Almonds are good, he said.   When he got the job he gave his age 
as much younger than my grandfather.   They did not realise people from Islamabad or even Peshawar would think me very 
backward.   I was presented with a cheque for half a million rupees, about $4,500, for my campaign 
for girls rights.   Then he took some 
gur, dark molasses made from sugar cane, and rolled it around his mouth to moisten it with spit.   When someone takes away your pens you realise quite how 
important education is.   Moniba and I had been reading the Twilight books 
and longed to be vampires.   We are supposed to be collecting money in enrolment 
fees.   I replied, If there is a snake and a lion 
coming to attack us what would we say is good, the snake or lion? 

Our school was a haven from the horrors outside.   Baitullah denied responsibility, which was unusual for the Taliban.   

Then there were more attacks.   He raged against the Lai Masjid attack and vowed to avenge the death of Abdul Rashid.   Our own museum in Swat had 
closed.   It seemed to me that his every wish 
was her command.   Let him stay and we will cover for him 

Every day it seemed a new edict came.   This is a very 
special verse and we believe that if you say it three times at night your home will be safe from 
shayatin or devils.   

As my father had found with Naeem, it is not easy to mix business and friendship.   We want to be free to go to school or to go to work.   The army must do something for the future of the valley, not just 
focus on the military operation, I said.   They 
opened the doors of their homes, schools and mosques to the refugees.   Often he would weep as he spoke of 
his love for Islam Usually he spoke for a while, then his deputy Shah Douran came on air, a man who 
used to sell snacks from a tricycle in the bazaar.   Kainat had not realised she was hurt to start with and had gone home, 
then discovered she had been grazed by a bullet at the top of her right arm so her family had brought 
her in.   The fire is reaching the valley.   However, he got a wealthy philanthropist, Azaday Khan, to pay 
for him to produce a leaflet asking, Kia hasool e elum in bachun ka haq nahe?  Is education not 
the right of these children? My father printed thousands of these leaflets, left them at local meetings 
and distributed them around town.   The city was silent and emptied of people and 
traffic as if a plague had descended.   But his wife and younger brother stayed inside, along with many 
students, and there were daily exchanges of gunfire between the militants and the troops outside.   No one 
doubted they were serious.   It was just one question worth only one mark, but it made me feel that 
something devastating was going to happen.   People jokingly referred to the MMA as the Mullah Military 
Alliance and said they got elected because they had Musharraf s support.   Moniba often brought 
food to school and would just bring one spare fork.   He described Pakistans courts as unIslamic and said, I 
consider Western democracy a system imposed on us by the infidels.   We knew many victims of feuds.   Why was Zahid Khan attacked if theres peace? Who attacked him? they demanded.   But tragically she had died that January of a heart attack following an epileptic fit.   If they were 
going to kill me they would have done it in 2009, I said.   Almost two 
million of us were fleeing Swat and you couldnt have fitted two million people in those camps.   Some gave their life savings, believing that this would make God happy.   Some of the 
girls refused, saying their teachers had taught them that to become a martyr is a glorious thing.   Sometimes I would mimic the teachers.   

Leaving our home felt like having my heart ripped out.   She always says, I have four brothers, and if I do even the slightest thing wrong they can stop 
me going to school.   It sounded like a disease.   I told him that we wanted 
our schools rebuilt and a girls university in Swat.   

All this happened and nobody did a thing.   

Then Id pray.   

My father also loved to write poetry, sometimes about love, but often on controversial themes such 
as honour killings and womens rights.   He and my 
father had studied for their bachelors and masters degrees in English together and were both 
passionate about education.   

After my school closed down I continued to write the blog.   But 

We lived in the most beautiful place in all the world.   You just splashed water and took pictures, 
so dont be scared.   In reality I went back inside.   She was big for her age but was still only thirteen.   

Colonel Junaid explained that a bone had fractured and splinters had gone into my brain, creating a 
shock and causing it to swell.   They also said it wasnt up to us to sort 
out the problem.   He opened up our media, allowing 
new private TV channels and female newsreaders, as well as showing dancing on television.   

He began by telling us about the military operation in Swat, which he presented as a victory.  

Swat lies on a geological fault line and we often had earthquakes, but this felt different.   I have informed my family and they are very unhappy.   

He laughed.   Even so, some teachers still gave us homework.   .   

At home I started bolting the main gate of our house at night.   Though she cannot read or write, my father shares everything with 
her, telling her about his day, the good and the bad.   My father was desperate not to give up the school so agreed to pay Naeem a return 
on his share of the investment.   I wrote about being afraid to go to school because of the Taliban 
edict and looking over my shoulder all the time.   In my heart was the belief that God would protect 
me.   

When I was around four years old I asked my father, Aba, what colour are you? He replied, I 
dont know, a bit white, a bit black.   He read the great poems of Saadi, Allama Iqbal and Rumi to my father with such 
passion and fire it was as if he was teaching the whole mosque.   Shangla is all mountain, mountain, 
mountain and just a small sky.   

I gave the note to my father and he was angry.   When my father went to the police they 
showed him a file on me.   When the TV news began to show the devastation 
we saw that entire villages had been turned to dust.   During the Afghan 
jihad many madrasas had been built, most of them funded by Saudi money, and many young men had 
passed through them as it was free education.   So far we had driven in the opposite direction, but we had had to take the only lift we could 
get out of Swat.   This was perhaps because the military 
had been so attached to the mosque.   My two grandfathers did not get on.   Why hasnt he been caught? 
Afterwards people told him to be very careful.   I was 
relieved that the Pakistan Studies exam had gone well so I agreed.   We had no bathroom or kitchen, and my mother cooked on a wood 
fire on the ground and washed our clothes at a tap in the school.   In the next room was a soldier who had been horrifically burned in an IED attack 
and had a leg blown off.   

On our short trips we forgot our troubles in Swat.   Our home 
was near Circuit House, the army headquarters, so we were worried it might have been destroyed in 
the shelling.   

My father had resisted leaving till the end.   Manual workers made a great 
contribution to our society but received no recognition, and this is the reason so many of them joined 
the Taliban to finally achieve status and power.   For a while her daughters also had to collect 
rubbish to survive.   I entrust her to you 



As soon as Usman Bhai Jan realised what had happened he drove the dyna to Swat Central Hospital 
at top speed.   
Stop this or you will be in trouble and your children will weep and cry for you It was signed, 
Fedayeen of Islam.   

Someone has been in here, my father said as soon as we entered the courtyard.   When my father asked why, he explained it was his villages turn to work on 
Fazlullahs buildings.   But there was no clean water and people started dying from cholera.   While some papers described me as a peace icon, others carried the usual conspiracy 
theories, some bloggers even questioning if I had really been shot.   Then they disappeared off to Islamabad if they were elected to the National 
Assembly, or Peshawar for the Provincial Assembly, and wed hear no more of them or their 
promises.   The Taliban bulldozed both our Pashtun values and the values of Islam.   She is only there to prove that Isa [Jesus] was the son of Maryam, not the 
son of God! 

That may be, replied my father.   
Sometimes it felt as though it was all about the money.   But Fazlullahs headquarters were just a few miles away, and 
even though the Taliban were not near our house they were in the markets, in the streets and the hills.   The fighting was taking place 
outside Mingora though we could still hear gunfire.   He laughed at the idea.   
But the police did nothing to find him.   She took the pink phone that Aba bought me.   Some boundaries cannot be crossed.   

When he heard the news my father said the earth fell away from his feet.   Until I was eight or nine my mother used to cut my hair short 
like my brothers because of lice and also to make it easier to wash and brush as it would get messed 
up under my shawl.   Each of these strands has many different subgroups.   It was almost unbelievable Islamabad is 
usually a quiet, orderly place, very different to the rest of our country.   Usually its a 
complete confusion of Flying Coaches and rickshaws, but now it was completely deserted.   



My father had had enough.   We know him affectionately as Badshah Sahib, and though he was 
completely illiterate, he managed to bring peace to the valley.   He didnt want to go alone 
with the officials and insisted my mother come too.   



15 

Leaving the Valley 



Leaving the valley was harder than anything I had done before.   She even helped whitewash the school walls, holding up the lanterns so they could paint 
when the light went off in power cuts.   The brothers 
were famed for their fiery sermons and attracted thousands of worshippers, particularly after 9/11.   

In Pakistan we were still under a dictatorship, but America needed our help, just as it had in the 
1980s to fight the Russians in Afghanistan.   The Taliban were known to listen at peoples doors then force their way in, 
take the TVs and smash them to pieces on the street.   His teachers and friends tried to dissuade him and his father was 
reluctant to write the speech for him.   You think he will be happy with tea? He wants his money.   
But this was different.   They had no interest in developing Swat.   
Fortunately, many of his family live in the same area and they exchanged fire with the attackers, 
forcing them to flee.   

We were there one week and predictably Moniba and I quarrelled.   In the name of Allah, I am dying! 

You could hear the Taliban shouting, Hold her down.   Visitors can turn up 
whenever they wish and can stay as long as they want.   
The British government had offered assistance but needed a formal request from the Pakistan 
government.   He even asked friends to throw dried fruits, sweets and coins into my cradle, something 
we usually only do for boys.   When we reached Mingora 
we were shocked.   I began to think that maybe I should go to Peshawar or abroad or maybe I could ask our 
teachers to form a secret school in our home, as some Afghans had done during Taliban rule.   Before she arrived Maryam had called to warn her, 
When you see Malala dont cry or shout.   The 
military finally lost patience and stormed the compound.   Though we still had our 
television they had switched off the cable channels.   Across 
the tribal areas people were angry and many joined militant groups or formed lashkars, local militias.   Afterwards people told him his name 
was heard on Mullah FM in a threat from Shah Douran.   One hot day she had fetched water for her fellow workers but some of 
them refused to drink it, saying that the water was unclean because she was a Christian.   


It was school that kept me going in those dark days.   I thought my school would not close and it had.   How could they stop more than 50,000 girls from going to school in the twenty first 
century? I kept hoping something would happen and the schools would remain open.   She was a poor mother of five who picked fruit for a 
living in a village in Punjab.   

We heard on the news that Musharraf had sent 3,000 troops into our valley to confront the Taliban.   Islam teaches us to treat women politely, he said.   When my father first brought his 
wife to school, all the teachers referred to her as my brothers wife or Bhabi.   Then Id pray to God, Bless us.   He told people, I know there is something different about 
this child.   

I would reply, It doesnt matter; Im also looking at them, and shed get so cross.   

It was April 2012, the month after our exams so we were all feeling relaxed.   



General Kayani and General Ahmad Shuja Pasha, the head of ISI, were called to testify in 
parliament, something that had never happened.   Besides he had seven other children to think about.   She also said I must leave my school bag because there was 
so little room I was horrified.   They 
were keeping the cars in lines but with weapons not whistles.   Before we left, Moniba and I had an argument over something so silly I cant remember what it 
was.   One 
day he called my father excitedly to say hed found the ideal place.   To me he seemed very thin and small, like a reed that 
could snap in the wind, but he was the apple of her eye, her ladla.   Malala is not just the daughter of Ziauddin, they would say; she is the daughter of all of 
us.   
The Taliban have never come for a small girl.   Even the Queen of England came, and stayed in the White Palace that was built from the 
same marble as the Taj Mahal by our king, the first wali of Swat.   

There seemed to be so many things about which people were fighting.   Thats why I dont want to greet you 

Then one of the other men spoke up.   My cousin quickly gave us his music cassettes to hide in our purses.   The Americans say they gave Pakistan billions of 
dollars to help their campaign against alQaeda but we didnt see a single cent.   Today it has around twenty million people.   But my father is an 
optimistic man and never deterred by practicalities.   But Baba kept complaining about the 
drain on his income and made my mothers life miserable.   One night the Taliban held what we call a flag march near our street and patrolled the roads 
with guns and sticks as if they were the army.   There are still many pictures of 
him around.   Our friends couldnt believe it.   None of the 
older women had any education but they all told stories and recited what we call tapey, Pashto 
couplets.   Its actually the largest Pashtun city in 
the world, even though its far from our lands; between five and seven million Pashtuns have gone 



there to work.   We had 
to borrow clothes from our relatives as we hadnt brought much.   The attack seemed to send the message that the CIA could do as it pleased in our 
country.   My feeling was that nobody can stop death; it doesnt matter if it comes from a 
talib or cancer.  m when they 
saw me for the last time in Pakistan.   Khaista, Pisho, Bhabi, Khushal, Atal! Then we heard sirens, one after another as if 
all the ambulances of Mingora were passing.   
While we were there we heard that Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the American envoy to Pakistan 
and Afghanistan, was holding a meeting in the Serena Hotel about the conflict, and my father and I 
managed to get inside.   One of them was her neighbour, 
who was angry because she said Asia Bibis goat had damaged her water trough.   

My father said the radio station was the talk of the staffroom.   There was music all night long.   I guess he ended up 
somewhere in the middle.   We visited the Faisal Mosque at the base of the Margalla Hills, which was built by the Saudis 
for millions of rupees.   The worst thing that can happen to a Pashtun is loss of face.   My father didnt 
know what to do.   

It was about 5.   They thought it was 
shameful for their children to mix with those from poor families.   She began praying with the Holy Quran in her hand, standing facing the wall, 
reciting verses over and over for hours.   
Finally we got news from a cousin.   During my fathers first term at 
college national elections were held, which were won by Benazir Bhutto, daughter of the prime 
minister who had been executed when my father was a boy.   Now we must wait 

I have another stupid question, said my father.   But after a while 
the school started to break even and my father began to plan a second school, which he wanted to call 
the Malala Education Academy.   My father was horrified, thinking this meant I had internal 
bleeding.   
Because of his role as spokesman for the Swat Qaumi Jirga, he acted as a kind of liaison between the 
people and the army.   Nurses and doctors kept coming in and out.   

On the last day we all had to give a speech at the Islamabad Club about our experiences in the 
valley under Taliban rule.   The Taliban targeted not only politicians, MPs and the police, but also 
people who were not observing purdah, wearing the wrong length of beard or the wrong kind of 
shalwar kamiz.   Though later he became less regular in his 
prayers, in those days he used to leave home at dawn every morning to walk to a mosque in another 
village, where he studied the Quran with a senior talib.   

Near us on our street there was a family with a girl my age called Safina and two boys similar in age 
to my brothers, Babar and Basit.   All we could see was a little stamp of open sky out of the back and 
glimpses of the sun, at that time of day a yellow orb floating in the dust that streamed over everything.   


Toffees.   He was also an imam at the local mosque.   He also swept the floors, whitewashed the walls and cleaned the 
bathrooms.   She was beautiful and spoke in an 
animated way.   He was very concerned because at that time Khushal was still in Mingora, although later he 
was brought down to Rawalpindi to join them.   Sadly we could not see the walis room as it had been damaged by the floods.   That night 
when he went back to the army hostel, he took the passport from his pocket and gave it to my mother.   

My mother and her friends were upset about not being able to go shopping, particularly in the days 
before the Eid holidays, when we beautify ourselves and go to the stalls lit up by fairy lights that sell 
bangles and henna.   Then all that night we heard dar dar dar, the boom of cannons and machine guns 
from the hills.   

The Taliban destroyed the Buddhist statues and stupas where we played, which had been there for 
thousands of years and were a part of our history from the time of the Kushan kings.   The first words I spelt out were father and country.   But the second time they will steal 
something bigger and the third something bigger still.   

All of us girls made it clear that we wanted to see the Taliban brought to justice, but we werent 
very convinced this would happen.   
The most important jobs in the army, bureaucracy and government are all taken by Punjabis because 
they come from the biggest and most powerful province.   

A few days later, on 22 February, a permanent ceasefire was announced by Deputy 
Commissioner Syed Javid at the Swat Press Club in Mingora.   Suddenly there was the crack of gunfire and an 
explosion as a suicide bomber blew himself up by the side of her vehicle.   My grandfather would not buy enough gold so my father had to borrow 
more money to buy bangles.   As it was, Jinnah died in September 1948 just over a year later.   It seemed to 
him that everyone must know who was inside.   There was outrage round the world and all the talk shows covered 
the case.   

The next evening a small group of girls emerged.   They assumed their passports and visas were being processed and 
they would join me in a few days.   My father also designed a shield with a famous quote from Khattak in 
Pashto: I girt my sword in the name of Afghan honour.   My father gave 
money instead and she was distraught, saying that wasnt the same.   

We were watching the TV when the news came through.   Is she your daughter? asked the colonel.   If anything the Taliban became even more barbaric.   But then some of my parents friends had lost a relative 
in gunfire so they went to the house to offer prayers of condolences even though nobody was really 
venturing out.   The army say there is peace, said my father.   Because of the 
Taliban, the whole world is claiming we are terrorists.   Five days after I got the award, Aunt Babo, my mothers eldest 
sister, died suddenly.   They were all very enthusiastic as each one was hoping to be made the 
amir of their district so they could be in charge of imposing shariat.   

They were still patrolling the Cheena Bazaar.   Ms, ps and ks 
were all enemies lying in wait.   There is a third power stronger than both, that 
of women But General Zia brought in Islamic laws which reduced a womans evidence in court to 
count for only half that of a mans.   It could 
have been you.   Madam Maryam had even got married so she could stay in Swat.   A few more minutes, Aba, please, Id beg, then burrow deeper under the quilt.   These clerics said 9/11 was 
revenge on the Americans for what they had been doing to other people round the world, but they 
ignored the fact that the people in the World Trade Center were innocent and had nothing to do with 



American policy and that the Holy Quran clearly says it is wrong to kill.   He went there by bus, and it seemed so big 
to him compared to his home village that he thought hed arrived in a city.   

But my father had a big problem.   Her name Tor Pekai means raven tresses even though 
her hair is chestnut brown.   Why are you asking all these questions? he demanded.   Within a few hours of the attack, an 
influential local cleric called Faqir Mohammad, who had run the madrasa, announced that the deaths 
would be avenged by suicide bombings against Pakistani soldiers.   

That afternoon, when my father came home from school, I told him about the scavenger children 
and begged him to go with me to look.   She teases him a lot and gives him advice about 
who she thinks is a genuine friend and who is not, and my father says she is always right.   He would endlessly 
point out to my father that life on earth was short and that there were few opportunities for young men 
in the village.   One Talib could 
intimidate a whole village.   

Driving from the airport to the hostel, I was amazed by the number of people and houses and cars.   

Though we had no generator at home, my father bought one to install at the school, and fresh water 
was pumped from a borehole, which all the children in the neighbourhood went to collect.   He told him that the scan in Swat had been done from only one angle, but this 
new scan showed the injury was more serious.   
To avoid detection he used human couriers rather than phone calls or emails.   Wed also heard that many homes had been looted.   A doctor she knew told her the bullet had 
passed through my forehead, not my brain, and that I was safe.   She chatted with me for a while then with my father.   What about this bone? What will you do with it? 

After three months we will put it back, replied Dr Mumtaz.   It was, he says, the first thing Id done that made him smile.   We flew to 
Karachi, and it was the first time any of us had ever been on a plane.   

I knew that could not be true.   

Our people say it is a good system, and our crime rate is much lower than in nonPashtun areas.   We were a group of 
about seventy girls.   He joked to my father that if either of them had relatives 
to stay, they should pay a fine.   

We went to shops where I bought school books and Adam bought me DVDs of American TV 
programmes like Ugly Betty, which was about a girl with big braces and a big heart.   Only 
two escaped, and they fled to Peshawar along with their tribesmen.   Are you sure this is the only reason you are not 
coming? he asked.   

It was not easy to get from Besham to our village and we had to walk twentyfive kilometres 
carrying all our things.   They wouldnt put drops in if there was no 
chance.   In my country too many politicians think nothing 
of stealing.   
Once again I stayed up late, memorising the textbook about the history of our independence.   How 
can you? Rohul Amin asked, laughing.   

He had however neglected to tell his partner.   

Hes actually a highschool dropout whose real name isnt even Fazlullah, my father retorted, but 
they wouldnt listen.   She was diabetic and had seen a TV advert for 
a doctor in Lahore with some miracle treatment and persuaded my uncle to take her there.   Madam Maryam was a strict 
headmistress.   Their food was brought in by two brothers who also lived in the 



compound with their wives.   When I was in the street it felt as though every 
man I passed might be a talib.   When she paraded on an opentop bus through the streets, hundreds of 
thousands of people flocked to see her.   I had shared a cake with my friends.   There 
was no hospital.   CMH is a large sprawling brick 
hospital with 600 beds and dates from British rule.   It was an intensive care cubicle in the Queen Elizabeth Hospital.   He told them they would have their reward in the hereafter.   Prime Minister 
Yusuf Raza Gilani called for an inquiry and made a statement saying the flogging of the girl was 
against the teachings of Islam.   So everyone spoke with great authority, 
celebrating like the Prophet when he conquered Mecca, though his speech was one of forgiveness not 
cruel victory.   

My father was right to think this man was not going to give up mullahs had become more 
powerful figures since Zias rule and campaign of Islamisation.   

When we landed in Peshawar, they assumed wed be taken to Lady Reading Hospital, where there 
was a very good neurosurgeon called Dr Mumtaz who had been recommended.   When my father refused, a bill arrived with a large fine.   If you go around with a lot of security the Taliban will use Kalashnikovs or 
suicide bombers and more people will be killed, he said.   When the school assistants put the pans on the fire to heat up the chicken 
curry, they panicked that there was not enough food for so many girls and added water from the 
stream.   Our house 
was in Gulkada, which means place of flowers, but it used to be called Butkara, or place of the 



Buddhist statues.   The story was that they had then planted the body in Abbottabad and faked 
the raid to embarrass Pakistan.   We visited the Lok Virsa 
museum, and it was a joy to celebrate our national heritage once again.   The army was everywhere.   I saw tears in my parents eyes.   Life isnt just about taking in oxygen and giving out carbon dioxide.   

I had gone to bed when just before midnight the militants struck.   

Once Muslim Khan had said girls should not go to school and learn Western ways.   Now wait, we are coming to 
Islamabad, he shouted.   Even today 
people talk of Mr Bhutto as a man of great charisma.   My mothers family home, where Uncle Faiz Mohammad lived, was still standing but 
the road it stood on had vanished.   

My father and his friends were worried and called together local elders and leaders for a peace 
conference.   He gets so emotional you 
would think the events had happened just the night before, not more than 1,300 years ago.   I had read about 
Obama and admired him because as a young black man from a struggling family he had achieved his 
ambitions and dreams.   The drops sparkled in the sun.   We also heard that an army brigadier 
went to prayers led by Fazlullah.   

The army still had their guns trained on the mountains overlooking Mingora.   

The other girls didnt agree with me.   Almost two million of them were killed trying to cross the new border.   He would probably say that this was not the country he had wanted.   I think the Pakistan 
government is basically abdicating to the Taliban and the extremists, said Hillary Clinton, the US 
Secretary of State.   He died of tuberculosis just a year after the creation of Pakistan and we havent 
stopped fighting since.   Our men all have rifles, though these days they dont walk around with 
them like they do in other Pashtun areas, and my greatgrandfather used to tell stories of gun battles 
when he was a boy.   I knew he would not take my demands seriously so 
I didnt push very hard.   

This wasnt just happening in Swat.   Instead I am in a country which is five hours 
behind my beloved homeland Pakistan and my home in the Swat Valley.   But once inside he 



was told, We need someone to get blood from the blood bank.   I also knew from watching my own mother that Pashtun 
women are very powerful and strong.   



PART THREE 



Three Girls.   She told my father that Shazia was fine and had begged her, Look after 
Malala! 



We were taken to the helipad by ambulance under high security with motorcycle outriders and 
flashing blue lights.   They were little jewels without much 
meaning.   In the same way, if 
you choose a good method to do something bad its still bad.   He 
began building a vast redbrick headquarters in Imam Deri complete with a madrasa, a mosque and 
walls and levees to protect it from the Swat River.   Her nephew Fazli Hakim had to carry my father on his shoulders.   He had one much older brother, Saeed Ramzan who I call 
Uncle Khan dada, and five sisters.   We live as we have for centuries by a 
code called Pashtunwali, which obliges us to give hospitality to all guests and in which the most 
important value is nang or honour.   Even for the adults it was 
hard to imagine the biggest buildings in Swat are the hospital and a hotel, which are two or three 
storeys.   I got so fed up with it that one day I told Atal to bring the boy inside.   Atal suggested we buy them nappies! In the end 



we left them with a lot of water and corn.   Down on the river at the Karshat end were 
water buffaloes.   My brother 
Khushal was now at school in Abbottabad, so it was just me, my parents and Atal.   Why are we here? I thought wed go to the civil hospital.   We are told that Swat is 
being sacrificed for the sake of Pakistan, but no one and nothing should be sacrificed for the state.   

All through that spring and summer odd things kept happening.   My brothers loved this, and they would taunt me and my mother by pointing out the 
wreckage of vehicles on the mountainside.   At the top of the steps was an open courtyard with doors to all the 
classrooms.   She asked when my 
blood pressure had last been checked.   How many teachers do you have? Three! Your teachers are not trained.   He had spoken at an event to commemorate the 
third anniversary of the bombing of the Haji Baba High School.   We are supposed to take revenge for 
wrongs done to us, but where does that end? If a man in one family is killed or hurt by another man, 
revenge must be exacted to restore nang.   Its a big question for the army and administration.   He wanted a land of 
tolerance.   

The guard explained that the tomb in the main room under a giant chandelier from China did not 
contain Jinnahs body.   

In our valley we received most of our information from the radio because so many had no TV or 
are illiterate.   I was reminded 
of our history lessons, in which we learned about the loot or bounty an army enjoys when a battle is 
won.   Nowhere is it written in the Quran 
that a woman should be dependent on a man.   We had a new 
government under President Asif Zardari, the widower of Benazir, but they didnt seem to care about 
Swat.   It 
wasnt really a march but a cavalcade of cars.   Afghanistan is less 
than a hundred miles away, but to get there you have to go through Bajaur, one of the tribal areas 
between Pakistan and the border with Afghanistan.   Next door to us the Shah of Iran had been overthrown in a revolution a few months 
earlier so the CIA had lost their main base in the region.   Two other wives and his eleven children lived below them.   I couldnt believe it.   When he became army 
chief the first thing General Kayani did was improve housing, food rations and education for ordinary 
soldiers rather than officers.   We 
havent done anything wrong.   One school gave its 
teachers salaries for a month, but most didnt know what to do as they couldnt afford to pay.   He was a mesmerising speaker.   I loved that book and read 
it over and over again.   So most of the pictures I found 
were of his sister Fatima.   While we had been IDPs and for all the months the school had 
been closed he had collected no fees, but the teachers still expected to be paid.   

It was in one of Yaseem s newspapers that my father read for the first time some of the incredible 
international reaction to my shooting.   Our teachers and my parents were there too.   When we decorated our hands 
with henna for holidays and weddings, we drew calculus and chemical formulae instead of flowers 
and butterflies.   

Yes, Malala, he replied.   I wrinkled my nose as I approached, swatting away flies and making sure I didnt step 
on anything in my nice shoes.   Education is our right, I said.   Taking a rifle away from a Pashtun is 
like taking away his life, so he could not disarm the tribes.   The helicopter flight was one hour and fifteen minutes.   They barricaded 
themselves and the madrasa students inside concrete bunkers with sandbags.   

I was confused by Fazlullahs words.   My father would make him good tea and offer him biscuits in the hope that would 
keep him satisfied.   Even so, Swat was our home and we were not ready to leave it.   The Taliban then took two police stations in 
Khwazakhela and moved on to Madyan, where more police officers gave up their weapons.   

At twelve oclock Baba called us over the loudspeaker.   Other people said Davis was really spying on our nuclear weapons.   The competition was always between me and my best friend Moniba, 
who had beautiful writing and presentation, which the examiners liked, but I knew I could beat her on 
content.   I was the one who would help other pupils 
who had difficulties.   Miss Rubi, one of my favourite teachers, told us to stop crying and to stay 
calm; it would soon be over.   Some men refused to fight, not wishing to battle their own people.   My mother always told me, Hide your face people are looking at 
you.   They were strange elections as the main 
party leaders Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto were in exile.   She was 
just sixteen, one year older than me.   

Aba, you must give them free places at your school, I begged.   We 
have fields of wild flowers, orchards of delicious fruit, emerald mines and rivers full of trout.   He had written, Now you have become very popular, I still love 
you and know you love me.   While most of us 
cant live with our wives, he couldnt be without his.   But unlike in other years no 



date was announced for the start of next term.   Safina said nothing about my phone, which didnt seem fair, but I didnt 
mention it either.   He used his 
station to encourage people to adopt good habits and abandon practices he said were bad.   But the 
Russians ended up stuck in Afghanistan for ten years, through most of the 1980s, and when he became 
a teenager my father decided he too wanted to be a jihadi.   At either end is a huge mountain Tor Ghar, the Black Mountain to the south, and 
Spin Ghar, the White Mountain, to the north.   She 
wanted to buy a new cradle for him when I was born my father couldnt afford one so they used an 
old wooden one from the neighbours which was already third or fourth hand but my father refused.   

By the start of January 2009 there were only ten girls in my class when once there had been twenty 
seven.   Thats what he 
does.   Will she survive what do you think? 

In medicine two plus two does not always make four, replied Colonel Junaid.   They offered their private jet, which had its 
own onboard hospital.   I was sure it was my turn next 

We pleaded with my father not to go to the hospital as it was very late and the people who had 
attacked Zahid Khan might be waiting for him.   Zahid Khan was a hotel owner and had a big 
hujra.   What are you 
dreaming about? 

Just about crossing oceans, Aba , I replied.   She was bad, and it was right that she was killed.   God is not a miser, she said.   We were scared, but our fear was not as strong as our courage.   I 
was different I never hid my desire when I changed from wanting to be a doctor to wanting to be an 
inventor or a politician.   They wanted to kill two birds with one stone.   We Pashtuns are a religionloving people, she said.  m.   

It was in Spal Bandi that my father came across women who had great freedom and were not 
hidden away as in his own village.   Khushal had a toy helicopter and Atal a pistol 
made of paper, and one would shout, Fire! and the other, Take position I didnt care.   There was a beautiful fifteenyearold girl called Seema.   The helipad was only a mile away, a fiveminute drive, 
but he was scared the whole way.   Many never came back.   For some reason my 
fathers keys would not work so we found a boy who climbed over the wall and opened it from the 
inside.   But now they seemed to be more 
alarmed about Pakistan than Afghanistan.   It was as if under Zia jihad had become the 
sixth pillar of our religion on top of the five we grow up to learn the belief in one God, namaz or 
prayers five times a day, giving zakat or alms, roza fasting from dawn till sunset during the month 
of Ramadan and haj, the pilgrimage to Mecca, which every ablebodied Muslim should do once in 
their lifetime.   

There were a lot of us not just us five but also my grandmother, my cousin, his wife, Honey, and 
their baby.   We went with my fathers friend Fazal Maula and his 
daughter.   

One day a lady called Shehla Anjum turned up at our hostel.   Finally, they let us through.   My mother took me to say sorry to Safina and 
her parents.   It was 
leaning against the wall and I screamed as we lifted it.   Almonds are very costly.   Our weddings go on for several days of feasting.   

When my parents finally got back to the hostel it was with a very heavy heart.   From what we could see, most of them werent convinced it was safe to return.   My father was angry.   This will not last, my father predicted.   They muttered about hidden hands and unseen forces.   It seemed very far away.   No one knew where he got the cement and iron 
bars from but the workforce was local.   She was always out helping people.   My father said they were from the intelligence services.   
There was no other college in Shangla, and if he didnt go to college, he would never be able to move 



out of the village and realise his dream.   As in much of our country, there were concrete 
blocks and checkpoints all around CMH to protect it from suicide bombers.   At first we thought we were safe 
in Mingora, the biggest town in Swat.   There was a lot of construction going on to build a 
new tower block.   The consolation this time, however, was that there was no radio to spread this message! 

While all this suffering was going on, while people were losing their loved ones, their homes and 
their livelihoods, our president, Asif Zardari, was on holiday at a chateau in France.   I have no personal quarrel with the principal but 
I am telling you what Islam says.   These would select the best students 
from private schools in the district, and one year MalkaeNoor and I got exactly the same marks.   He immediately thought, Malala could be on that bus! 
Then he tried to reassure himself, thinking it might be a boy, a jealous lover who had fired a pistol in 
the air to shame his beloved.   
General Kayani was determined to change this, and the army had once again stepped in where the 
civilians had failed.   To begin with 
she didnt say much in class.   
Now listen to the sound of your lockets and bangles.   They warned people to stop listening to music, 
watching movies and dancing.  8 million population had left 
our valley.   We had enjoyed a glimpse of a different life in Islamabad.   I took out my books one by one and just stared at them Maths, physics, Urdu, English, 
Pashto, chemistry, biology, Islamiyat, Pakistan studies.   The 
Taliban were dressed in black and carried Kalashnikovs.   Malala is not just a good speaker but also a 
good writer.   The children sang for me and I was presented with a painting of me looking 
up at the sky.   (The 
average annual income is just $250 half the Pakistani average.   In the 
yard I hugged all my friends.   

We were shocked.   He had asked for my fathers advice.   Many people were scared.   

Our words were like the eucalyptus blossoms of spring tossed away on the wind.   They even took control of 
the famous shrine of a Sufi saint, Pir Baba, which was a pilgrimage site.   We worried about our family in Shangla, though my 
father said the village was too remote for the Taliban to bother with and local people had made it 
clear they would keep them out.   

Whats done is done, my father insisted.   Yes, OK.   It felt as if my honour was at stake for five 
rupees, he told me.   Pashtuns are a proud 
people of many tribes split between Pakistan and Afghanistan.   What you are doing is against our people and 
against Pakistan, he would say.   Water running from every tap, hot or 
cold as you wish; lights at the flick of a switch, day and night, no need for oil lamps; ovens to cook on 
that dont need anyone to go and fetch gas cylinders from the bazaar.   Neither 
man could get any money from their families, and Hidayatullah was not pleased to discover that my 
father was still in debt to lots of people from college, so they were always receiving letters 
demanding money.   My father often spoke of the kindness of Akbar Khan and Nasir Pacha to illustrate 
that if you help someone in need you might also receive unexpected aid.   It was always our 
mother who shopped for our clothes and took us to hospital if we were ill, even though in our culture, 
particularly for those of us from villages, a woman is not supposed to do these things alone.   We liked performing plays.   

We also learned that American politicians were furious that bin Laden had been living under our 
noses when all along they had imagined he was hiding in a cave.   
Malala swung in that cradle, he said.   The Taliban 
took over the Emerald Mountain with its mine and began selling the beautiful stones to buy their ugly 
weapons.   He was starting to lose hope.   We went on our first ever visit to the theatre to see an English play called Tom, Dick and 
Harry and had art classes.   Two days later Ayatollah 
Khomeini, the supreme leader of Iran, issued a fatwa calling for Rushdies assassination.   Then 9/11 had made this militancy more mainstream.   It 
was very sad as in the end the family was betrayed and arrested and Anne died in a concentration 
camp when she was only fifteen.   We stayed in a guesthouse and did 
lots of workshops on how to tell our stories so people outside would know what was going on in our 
valley and help us.   My mother, father, grandmother, my cousins wife and baby and my 
brothers all squashed into the back of Dr Afzals van along with his wife and children.   We all started crying and praying for 
her.   My father kept trying to persuade Naeem s friends and family to stay so 
he could be fined too! 

After three months Naeem had had enough.   I am talking to the women Then hed say, Women are meant to 
fulfil their responsibilities in the home.   It was the first time the army had launched an operation against its own people outside 
the FATA.   Sultana was very shorttempered and my mother did not like having 



her in the house, but my father arranged a small allowance for her and a place for Shehnaz and her 
other brother at his school.   It 
looked like the remains of someones dinner.   Pa tool 
jehan ke da khushala da, he sang.   They escaped through these and over the 
mountains into Kurram, another tribal agency.   

At night the village was very dark with just oil lamps twinkling in houses on the hills.   

Fazlullahs men patrolled the streets looking for offenders against his decrees just like the Taliban 
morality police we had heard about in Afghanistan.   They would stop us but seemed unaware of each others 
presence.   My father used to grumble, Were a school not a poultry farm.   They had to pay 
them rent in kind, usually a share of their crop.   But he refused to be silent.   Others said he had been ordered to deliver this speech and been warned, If you dont, 
there are four or five suicide bombers who will blast you and everyone there.   Every few years Pakistan sent us a new deputy commissioner, or DC, to govern 
Swat, just as the British had done in colonial days.   They thought I was modern because I came 
from town.   

But not immediately.   

Then around 3 p.   

They are scared of the pen, he replied.   They were both away when, ten days later, there 
was a second flood and the building again filled with mud.   

I told the documentary makers, They cannot stop me.   I teased him that one of the reasons he called me Jani was because he 
found it easier to say than Malala.   Very 



quickly the Taliban controlled most of Swat outside Mingora.   The man chosen to be the leader or caliph was Abu Bakr, a close 
friend and adviser of the Prophet and the man he chose to lead prayers as he lay on his deathbed.   

That same week our maths teacher Miss Shazia arrived at school in a hysterical state.   Her husband was a policeman in 
the small town of Matta, and Fazlullah s men had stormed in and some police officers had been 
killed, including her husband.   When 
the earthquake happened and our government did little to help, JuD set up relief camps patrolled by 



men with Kalashnikovs and walkietalkies.   

Growing up, we children spent most of our time with our mother.   

During Eid we went to our family village as usual.   The village 
received no electricity from the government so many villagers got their power from these makeshift 
hydroelectric projects.   They had no phone and no access to a 
computer to check on my progress.   In order to protect womens purdah, men in 
families hosting the refugees even slept away from their own homes.   Sometimes a group of girls would go down to the river 
for a picnic with pots of rice and sherbet.   



We remembered how scared we had been that morning and started raising money at school.   Dont they want 
them to learn? 

Our headmistress Madam Maryam had studied at Sangota, and her younger sister Ayesha was a 
pupil there, so she and some of the other Sangota girls transferred to our school.   My father had hired three Flying 
Coaches but we could not all fit in, so five of us me, Moniba and three other girls were in the 
dyna, the school van.   

Then another teacher at our school, a maths teacher with long hair, also refused to teach girls.   

I didnt write anything about it in my diary.   I was so cross with 
myself I almost cried.   It means we want to make decisions 
for ourselves.   Tennis Balls and the Buddhas of Swat 



First the taliban took our music, then our Buddhas, then our history.   As we skipped 
through, we cast off our head scarves like winds puffing away clouds to make way for the sun then 
ran helterskelter up the steps.   It felt sacred to us.   

On the day only eight or nine boys and girls turned up.   What really depressed him was the looting of the destroyed schools the furniture, the 
books, the computers were all stolen by local people.   I thought, Surely how the system works depends on the people overseeing it? The 
Taliban.   The odd thing was no one had even noticed the publication of the book to start 
with it wasnt actually on sale in Pakistan but then a series of articles appeared in Urdu 
newspapers by a mullah close to our intelligence service, berating the book as offensive to the 
Prophet and saying it was the duty of good Muslims to protest.   I couldnt space letters.   So he called my cousin to take him.   

That evening my father received a call from the family who had been sharing our home for the last 
eighteen months.   Our own street was on a hill so we were a bit better protected from the overflowing river, but 
we shivered at the sound of it, a growling, heavybreathing dragon devouring everything in its path.   Everyone wanted me in their family as I was from Mingora and 
modern.   We Pashtuns love shoes but dont love the cobbler; we 
love our scarves and blankets but do not respect the weaver.   The only television was in the hujra of one of 
the wealthier families, and no one had a computer.   The monthly school 
fees were never enough to cover all our outgoings so the extra fees were welcome, but my father was 
unhappy.   I told my best friend Moniba everything.   To my joy I found my 
school bag still packed with my books, and I gave thanks that my prayers had been answered and that 
they were safe.   

There was more to school than work.   Sindhis often talk of separation and in Baluchistan there is an ongoing 
war which gets talked about very little because it is so remote.   He made bargains with God.   The wali administered justice, kept the peace between warring tribes and collected 
ushur a tax of ten per cent of income with which he built roads, hospitals and schools.   Was 
it because of the cry of a woman? 

When the waters receded, they found their home and school destroyed: their furniture, carpets, 
books, clothes and the audio system entirely caked in thick foulsmelling mud.   But then Maryam noticed me trying to wipe my mouth with my 
scarf.   Soon our prisons were full of cases like that of a thirteenyearold 
girl who was raped and become pregnant and was then sent to prison for adultery because she 
couldnt produce four male witnesses to prove it was a crime.   

When he finally found my father, he learned that he had heard a woman crying that her husband was 
trapped in their house and he had rushed in to save him.   My mother enjoyed these stories, but my father was horrified.   After the PM presented 
me with the award and cheque, I presented him with a long list of demands.   
It was cramped with twenty girls and three teachers.   



In 2002 Musharraf held elections for controlled democracy.   He wanted to show the human side of the catastrophe in 
Swat.   An 
army major was assigned to my parents and followed them everywhere.   One of them was a maulana and my father managed to get him freed.   

Someone gave me a copy of The Alchemist by Paulo Coelho, a fable about a shepherd boy who 
travels to the Pyramids in search of treasure when all the time its at home.   Money poured in from all over the Arab 
world, particularly Saudi Arabia, which matched whatever the US sent, and volunteer fighters too, 
including a Saudi millionaire called Osama bin Laden.   

Dr Javid asked to see my father privately.   My mother had already offered her 
bangles to pay for my fathers nephew to go to college, which my father had rashly promised to fund 
fortunately, my fathers cousin Jehan Sher Khan had stepped in and she did not realise the bangles 
were only partly paid for.   So at first we thought we were in danger.   Like most people in Swat we 
are from the Yousafzai tribe.   

My father suspected this would not be the end of the matter.   No Pakistani, including my father, thought this deal would 
work as Musharraf and Benazir hated each other.   I was thousands of miles away from home with a 
tube in my neck to help me breathe and unable to speak.   Actually some people thought it got worse.   I could 
listen endlessly to the story of how they met.   One day my father and I went to Peshawar to appear on a BBC Urdu talk show hosted by 
a famous columnist called Wasatullah Khan.   

Sometimes his voice was reasonable, like when adults are trying to persuade you to do something 
you dont want to, and sometimes it was scary and full of fire.   Near our home was a field scattered with mysterious ruins statues of lions on 
their haunches, broken columns, headless figures and, oddest of all, hundreds of stone umbrellas.   Thousands of people were leaving with just the 
clothes they had on their backs.   

Listen, Maulana, he told Fazlullah.   My father said later, I cant explain 
it.   I wished their outrage extended to the Talibans banning of girls education.   Even those who had 
defended Fazlullah at the start, believing his men were the real standardbearers of Islam, and given 
him their gold, began to turn against him My father told me about a woman who had donated 
generously to the Taliban while her husband was working abroad.   She didnt complain food needed to be cooked and she cooked it, and there were 
others worse off than us.   Once again our 
country was expelled from the Commonwealth and became an international black sheep.   They want to interview a small girl, but the girls are scared, and even if theyre 



not, their parents won t allow it.   



After that my father was restless and could not enjoy Karachi.   I agree that female teachers should educate girls, he said.   A group of boys from our neighbourhood used to hang round there.   On Thursday morning one of the specialists, 
Brigadier Aslam, called Dr Fiona.   Exams were due in March but how could they take place? Coming first didnt 
matter if you couldnt study at all.   As soon as we heard the 
broadcast on the radio, we set off.   All three brothers were killed.   Everyone complained about the drone attacks 
which were happening in the FATA almost every week.   She 
thought of sleeping with a knife under her pillow.   the local commander arrived and announced they were sending 
an army helicopter to take me and my father to Peshawar.   They had no power, as all their makeshift 
hydroelectric projects had been smashed to pieces.   My father went to everybody he knew, asking for donations of 
food, clothing and money, and I helped my mother collect blankets.   Besides, my father knew this 
could be our megaphone to the outside world.   

A few weeks later the same teacher told him that he could no longer teach girls as the maulana 
doesnt like it.   If people volunteered in the same way to construct schools or roads 
or even clear the river of plastic wrappers, by God, Pakistan would become a paradise within a 
year, he said.   Now you just need to catch 
Fazlullah.   There was a wall 
of screens in their office.   
O God, please make Malala well, prayed my father.   

My father tried to change his mind.   It was a recipe 
for another argument between Moniba and me.   Instead he built forts on mountains all 
across Swat and created an army.   The man was astonished and 



apologised for having tormented him.   We had suffered barbaric public courts and violent justice and had lived in a constant state of 
fear.   Then he did a 
tracheotomy as he was worried the swelling was blocking my airway.   Malalai went to 
the battlefield with other women from the village to tend the wounded and take them water.   The swelling had gone down and my blood levels had improved.   At that time of day Haji Baba 
Road was always a jumble of coloured rickshaws, people on foot and men on scooters, all zigzagging 
and honking.   

Usually there are many ways out of Mingora, but the Taliban had cut down several huge apple trees 
and used them to block some routes so everyone was squashed onto the same road.   The gunfire was in celebration.   What 
use are keys without Malala? Then they heard the sound of the helicopter.   I am 
representing good Muslims and we all think your girls school is haram and a blasphemy.   What are you doing? he asked.   Ziauddin, Malalas 
brain is swelling.   

There was no one to protect us.   He was smiling.   We decided to spend the rest of the money on people who 
needed help.   

In the hostel my parents waited.   But the girls of Swat are not afraid of anyone.   Her dream was to be a fashion designer 



although she knew her family would never agree to it, so she told everyone she wanted to be a doctor.   That 
changing climate made Ghulamullah bold.   You killed people, you slaughtered people, you beheaded 
people, you destroyed schools and still there was no protest in Pakistan.   

For him the closing of the schools also meant the loss of business.   Then they captured 
the airport and in a week they had taken back the city.   
Occasionally I made a low grunt and moved my hand or fluttered my eyes.   
Vast camps of white tents sprang up mostly around Peshawar, some of which are still there today.   But I had never done anything like this.   The 
teachers at the Khushal School demanded something.   At the back of the house was a 
veranda where the women gathered.   Soon mullahs all over Pakistan were 
denouncing the book, calling for it to be banned, and angry demonstrations were held.   My father didnt attend the 
gathering.   

My father became suspicious.   The shop would then 
sell it on at a profit.   But I was 
used to speaking in public so I came out and in front of all the boys I recited one naat, a poem in 
which I praised the Prophet.   It happened in a 
manner so dramatic that it sounds like something out of a movie.   

As my father was still teaching, Naeem wandered the streets looking for somewhere to rent.   Then we crammed in, fighting over the window seats even though the panes 
were so encrusted with dirt it was hard to see out of them The sides of Swat buses are painted with 
scenes of bright pink and yellow flowers, neonorange tigers and snowy mountains.   In some places, 
when the helicopters flew in the locals all rushed underneath them, which meant they could not drop 
supplies safely.   Everything he drew became real.   When my mother arrived, 
Hidayatullah had to move into the office and sleep on a hard wooden chair.   The real tomb is on the floor below, where he lies alongside his sister Fatima, 
who died much later.   The only charity they know is to give to mosque and madrasa.   I knew we were better off than those who lived in the camps, 
queuing for food and water for hours under the hot sun, but I missed my valley.   

Among the visitors who came and were not allowed in was Rehman Malik, the interior minister.   

Finally the goahead was given and the doctors had to face the problem of how I was to be moved 



and who would pay for it.   The dates of the feasts are announced by a 
special panel of clerics who watch for the appearance of the crescent moon.   In a short 
time they had taken over fiftynine villages and set up their own parallel administrations.   He wanted to make sure no one was pressuring him 

My wife told me, You cant leave us, my father said.   

One day a man from along the street came and told us that it had been announced in the mosques 
that there would be a curfew the next day.   One of the few he 



took was from the parents of Arfa Karim, a child computer genius from Punjab with whom I had 
spoken during forums.  m curfew and people heard her screaming, T promise Ill stop! I 
promise I wont sing and dance again.   There was some argument 
until Dr Javid made it clear who had sent them.   Neither place is a good place to be.   She had known my father since she was ten and they 
trusted each other completely she used to signal to him to wind up when he spoke for too long, 
which was often! 

The secret school is our silent protest, she told us.   When she was a teenager, both her father and the man she was supposed to marry were 
among thousands of Afghans fighting against the British occupation of their country.   

Usman Bhai Jan started the dyna and we were off.   He was so 
angry that he made the daylong bus journey to Mingora to see the Swat minister of education.   The boys would fish using 
earthworms threaded like beads on a string hanging from a long stick.   He became determined to end the traditional rivalry between him and his cousins.   

My first diary entry appeared on 3 January 2009 under the heading I am afraid : I had a terrible 
dream last night filled with military helicopters and Taliban.   It can be taken by killing any male member of the attackers 
family.   Nearby there were boys fishing in the pile for 
metal using magnets on strings.   

I played mostly with Khushal because he was just two years younger than me, but we fought all the 
time.   So many bodies 
had been left there that people started calling it the Bloody Square.   My friends and I 
didnt want that day to end so we decided to stay on for a while longer.   In Pashto we 
love to sing tapey, twoline poems, and as she scattered the rice she would sing one: Dont kill 
doves in the garden.   

Though I had been born in a city, I shared my fathers love of nature.   

The women were from Jamia Hafsa, the biggest female madrasa in our country and part of Lai 
Masjid the Red Mosque in Islamabad.   
Then a CIA agent called Raymond Davis shot and killed two men in Lahore who had approached his 
car on a motorbike.   He was worried about how 
confused I would be.   One girl even printed it out and brought it in to 
show my father.   Where will we go? we begged.   Many were 
slaughtered on trains which arrived at Lahore and Delhi full of bloodied corpses.   I looked at the honours board and wondered if my name would ever 
appear on it again.   

About a week after we had returned to school, on 16 February 2009, we were woken one night by 
the sound of gunfire.   

On 12 November Musharraf ordered 10,000 more troops into our valley with additional helicopter 
gunships.   I had 
been put into an induced coma, my vital signs were deteriorating, my face and body were swollen and 
my kidneys and lungs failing.   

Fortunately the Taliban had disappeared.   Finally they said I was 
stable.   People thought that he was a good interpreter of the Holy Quran and admired his 
charisma.   I wished I had her whitelily skin, fine features and green 
eyes, but instead had inherited the sallow complexion, wide nose and brown eyes of my father.   Look after your own affairs.   

In Swat we began to see more signs that the Taliban had never really left.   He also liked to talk about politics.   If you eat them with milk just before bed it makes you brainy But I 
knew he didnt have much money and the almonds in the dish were a reminder of my guilt.   

Everyone in Swat was jubilant, but I felt the happiest because it meant school would reopen 
properly.   Even though he was not a khan or a 
rich man, people listened to him.   I quickened my pace and after a 
while I looked back to see if he was following me.   A man came near my 
mother and she took her shoe off and hit him once then twice and he ran away.   His name was Malak Bakht Baidar.   We would sit on the 
floor around a long plastic sheet which my mother laid with food, and eat with our right hand as is our 
custom, balling together rice and meat.   I remembered the story of my father surprising 
my grandfather and longed to do the same.   Our family and friends said they had thought it was the end of the world.   He read it out.   First I thought it 
was a joke.   We all watched in horror.   

I think everyone makes a mistake at least once in their life.   We were afraid that the army wouldnt know 
who we were and would shoot us.   

The next morning the news was good.   We are peaceloving.   My father did not get 
home till late that evening as he had been busy checking all the other school buildings.   Our founder Jinnah wanted the rights of 
Muslims in India to be recognised, but the majority of people in India were Hindu.  / Either he leaves from 
poverty or he leaves for love.   It seemed to us that the Taliban arrived in the night just like vampires.   She might even kill you.   All sorts of questions flew through my waking brain: Where was I? Who had brought me 
there? Where were my parents? Was my father alive? I was terrified.   And hed been in Pakistan for more than nine years.   

To start with the only rescue workers who came were a few from a locally based foreign aid 
agency and volunteers from the TehrikeNifazeShariaeMohammadi (TNSM) or Movement for the 
Enforcement of Islamic Law, the group founded by Sufi Mohammad that had sent men to fight in 
Afghanistan.   Sadly those minority communities are 
often attacked.   My father does not respond well to being pushed and remained firm even though it was 
clear that by now he was creating havoc.   I even promised Allah that if I could 
grow just a tiny bit taller I would offer a hundred raakat nafl, extra voluntary prayers on top of the 
five daily ones.   My mother began to pray.   If you are unable to do that then you should tell others 
about it, and if you cant do that you should think about how bad it is in your heart.   

My fathers high school opened in 2003.   

I wore pink to the gala and for the first time talked publicly about how we had defied the Taliban 
edict and carried on going to school secretly.   Who are you? You are crazy! You 
need to go to a doctor.   On the road we 
passed dusty faced children bent double with huge bundles of grass on their backs and men leading 



flocks of shaggy goats that wandered hither and thither.   My father always said, Malala will be free as a 
bird.   He and his family lived 
with my grandfather, and whenever he saved up enough of his salary, they built a small concrete hujra 
at the side of the house for guests.   As he waited outside the headmasters office, he broke out into a 
sweat, and once inside his stutter was worse than ever.   

Within six months people were getting rid of their TVs, DVDs and CDs.   

Musharraf told our people that he had no choice but to cooperate with the Americans.   Many of the rich fled.   But finally I had persuaded her to let me grow it to my shoulders.   

Our Butkara ruins were a magical place to play hide and seek.   I am inspired by Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the man who some call the Frontier Gandhi, 
who introduced a non violent philosophy to our culture.   

Malala was a lucky girl, says Hidayatullah.   My father 
told him to go ahead, and Colonel Junaid said he would bring in Dr Mumtaz to help.   

The Americans said they had no choice but to do it like that because no one really knew which side 
the ISI was on and someone might have tipped off bin Laden before they reached him.   They dont have the 
power.   She rushed home and told my grandmother, who was staying with us at the time.   We 
have continued with our education.   When Sorayas family found out about the union they were furious.   We ran outside and they 
threw toffees and tennis balls down to us, which we rushed to catch.   What they did was like our traditional jirgas the 
Americans paid blood money amounting to $2.   

Our week at the guesthouse soon ended and we went to Haripur, where one of my aunts lived.   His friend had told him it would make far more impact 
than him roaming from pillar to post.   But they heard nothing.   I wanted to start an education foundation.   Please dont harm my children because the God you believe in is the same God 
they pray to every day.   
My father says that in that moment he could not hold back his tears.   Her own nurses from 
Birmingham were there waiting and had explained to the cardiology nurses the specific procedures 
for dealing with head injuries.   Sometimes though she would be out because 
she was shopping for clothes in the Cheena Bazaar, and that would be a different matter.   We dont have secrets from each other 
and we dont share our secrets with anyone else.   Bin Laden lived on the top floor with his youngest wife, a Yemeni woman 
named Amal.   I also 
like the name because my real name means griefstricken.   A small boy was 
brought to sit on their laps to encourage the birth of a son.   Dotted around were hives of bees.   Theyre just like our politicians they talk the talk but they wont do anything, Id 
said.   She was also our only political 
leader to speak out against the militants and even offered to help American troops hunt for bin Laden 
inside Pakistani borders.   The 
Taliban became the enemy of fine arts, culture and our history.   

I told you last night the issue was resolved, my father replied.   Then we have the Deobandi, named after 
another famous nineteenth century madrasa in Uttar Pradesh, this time in the village of Deoband.   In class, when we were reciting hydrocarbon formulae during our chemistry 
lessons, I would daydream about what it would be like to stop going to school and instead start 
looking after a husband.   

The militants did not give up easily.   

Our army had never before gone into the FATA.   A woman can only remarry if her 
husband is declared dead, not missing.   We couldnt play cricket in the street or on the roof like we used 
to.   

Then, at the end of 2008, Fazlullahs deputy Maulana Shah Dauran announced on the radio that all 
girls schools would close.   
Suddenly the school owners were in a position of power.   Why not your 
own hospital? General Kayani asked.   Then in the evening, when the white peak of Spin Ghar was 
even more beautiful than in the morning, we said the makkam or evening prayers.   AntiTaliban slogans were scrawled all over the walls.   

In March I stopped writing my blog as Hai Kakar thought there was not much more to say.   Atal would not stop 
weeping.   

Unfortunately not many people were convinced.   
Everyone knew she was in love with a boy, and sometimes he would pass by and she would look at 
him from under her long dark lashes, which all the girls envied.   She speaks 
better English than the rest of you and youre translating for her! We all laughed.   Chop, chop, chop.   My father was in tears as he gave her my passport and took her hand.   And now I had.   Only twice had I not come top both 
times when I was beaten by my class rival Malka eNoor.   There were already too many 
conspiracy theories floating around about my shooting, people saying I was a CIA agent and such 
things, and the army chief did not want to further fuel them This left Dr Javid in a difficult position.   Shiza Shahid, our friend from 
Islamabad, had finished her studies in Stanford and invited twentyseven girls from the Khushal 
School to spend a few days in the capital seeing the sights and taking part in workshops to help us get 
over the trauma of living under the Taliban.   For as long as my father could remember it had been 
his dream to open a school, but with no family contacts or money it was extremely hard for him to 
realise this dream He thought there was nothing more important than knowledge.   Anonymous.   

One day we got a call from America, from a student at Stanford University.   Why should you be 



paying bribes? You are not running brothels; you are educating children! Government officials are not 
your bosses, he reminded them; they are your servants.   It took them a week to clear the debris.   I kept losing my place as the pages danced in my 
shaking hands, but as I ended with Lincolns words, I looked up at my father.   Her story was like something out of the novels I had started reading.   When we learned she was dead, my heart said to me, Why don t you go there and fight for 
women s rights? We were looking forward to democracy and now people asked, If Benazir can die, 
nobody is safe.   

Oof, I was so happy, by God, says my father.   I had become interested in journalism after seeing how my 
own words could make a difference and also from watching the Ugly Betty DVDs about life at an 
American magazine.   I told my friends at school about the rubbishdump children and that we should help.   He even 
sanctioned an annual pop concert on the eve of Independence Day, which was broadcast to the nation.   
We sat stunned.   I 
had chosen Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Benazir Bhutto and President Barack Obama.   It seemed that people had decided the Taliban were here to stay and they had better get along 
with them.   By contrast we Pashtuns 
are very divided, some following Imran Khan because he is Pashtun, a khan and a great cricketer, 
some Maulana Fazlur Rehman because his party JUI is Islamic, some the secular ANP because its a 
Pashtun nationalist party and some the PPP of Benazir Bhutto or the PML(N) of Nawaz Sharif.   I used to say the Ay at alKursi, the 
Verse of the Throne from the second surah of the Quran, the Chapter of the Cow.   

And me, her beauty, he laughs.   Our friend Shiza and some of the activists we had met in Islamabad came to 
Mingora and distributed lots of money.   

We started to receive text messages asking us to rally in the streets and show our support of the 
army.   The highest mountain of all is the 
pyramid shaped Mount Elum To us its a sacred mountain and so high that it always wears a 
necklace of fleecy clouds.   Turning to the group, he said, When this 
gentleman passes me on the street, I look to him and greet him but he doesnt answer, he just bows his 
head.   He ran a boys hostel in Swat and was taking 
seven or eight boys to Kohistan by coach.   
Kill Malala and silence me for ever.   They agreed to form a united front under the banner of TehrikiTalibanPakistan (TTP), or 
the Pakistan Taliban, and claimed to have 40,000 fighters between them They chose as their leader a 
man in his late thirties called Baitullah Mehsud, who had fought in Afghanistan.   

The Musharraf government didnt seem to know what to do.   

My father was at his wits end and wept with frustration.   cant 
detect US helicopters but gets cable TV just fine, said another.   

Zahid Khan was in hospital for twelve days then at home recuperating for a month after having 
plastic surgery to repair his nose.   In Pakistan we had had a woman prime minister and in Islamabad I had met those impressive 
working women, yet the fact was that we were a country where almost all the women depend entirely 
on men.   My mother tried very hard to 
persuade him to come with us but he refused.   The girls will enter through that.   It would have taken us at least two days by bus.   It was simple.   A stage was set 
up near Fazlullahs centre, and after going to hear him give Friday prayers, hundreds of people 
gathered to watch the floggings, shouting Allahu akbarl  God is great! with each lash.   There in black and white were the words the patient may die.   Our headmistress had tried to persuade her to be a school prefect but she said she couldnt 
do anything that might distract her from her studies.   It was as if there 
was a feud between two brothers and they agreed to live in different houses.   His sisters my aunts did not go to school at all, just like 
millions of girls in my country.   They would stop for five, ten or fifteen minutes and then start 
again the moment we drifted off to sleep.   Most of the 
time they hid their faces.   My fathers hand 
shook as he signed the consent papers.   I thought if God wanted us to be like that He wouldnt have 
made us all different.   It is a very beautiful letter, full of good advice.   

One day we found our teacher Miss Hammeda in floods of tears.   Even though my father 
was not an elder or a khan, he was chosen as spokesperson as he was not afraid to speak out.   

Lunch was a disaster.   If I 
can help support one or two chil.   It was the biggest bomb ever to have gone off in our country.   It was also there that my father met his 



mentor Akbar Khan, who although he had not gone to college himself lent my father money so he 
could.   It was a decision that would save my life.   Shes alive! she shouted.   Our people dont know their exact dates of birth my mother, 
for example, does not know when she was born.   Electric pylons had been smashed into pieces so we had no 
power.   The Taliban set up shariat courts in all districts and 
broadcast sermons from mosques calling on the local youth to join them 

Just as they had in Swat, they burned TV sets, pictures, DVDs and tapes.   

Later that day we visited my aunt and uncle.   She loved him so much that she would slip him extra meat and the cream off the milk while 
she went without.   
Then my mother would come.   Many children had to have their classes in tents because 
the Taliban had destroyed their schools.   In fact, as my mother often reminds 
my father, he was not present for the actual ceremony.   They had their own website and pirate FM station 
on which they broadcast, just like Fazlullah.   I never said those things to your clerk.   

After that it is all a bit hazy.   My father was alarmed how would they 
know how to deal with head wounds? But Dr Fiona assured him it had the best intensive care in 
Pakistan with stateoftheart equipment and Britishtrained doctors.   

My fathers college held a heated debate in a packed room.   Madam Maryam had brought her baby boy and Hannah, her twoyearold, who looked like a 
little doll but was full of mischief.   We found that the building opposite 
the girls school had been hit by a missile but the school itself looked intact.   Even the woodpeckers.   People later said that some of this money had been diverted to finance a plot 
to bomb planes travelling from Britain to the US.   I was only eleven but I looked older, and the media seemed to like hearing from 
a young girl.   They 
said the Americans always preferred dealing with dictators in Pakistan.   

We were all at home that morning.   



I wrote a lot about school as that was at the centre of our lives.   But there were also text 
messages which ridiculed the army.   What are you doing? I asked 
him.   Ban Kimoon, the 
UN Secretary General, called it a heinous and cowardly act.   We hid our school bags and our books in our shawls.   Fazlullah denounced Pakistani government officials as 
infidels and said they were opposed to bringing in sharia law.   We 
were at school when the helicopters first arrived and were very excited.   But when would that be? we continually asked ourselves.   She told me her name was Rehanna and she was the Muslim chaplain.   A couple of 
weeks after Shabanas murder, a teacher in Matta was killed when he refused to pull his shalwar 
above the ankle the way the Taliban wore theirs.   

The first school to be blown up was Shawar Zangay, a government girls primary school in Matta.   

When Musharraf sent troops into the FATA, starting with Waziristan in 2004, the brothers led a 
campaign declaring the military action un Islamic.   

Having so many people around made it hard to study.   The army chief was 
spending a surprising amount of his time on the issue Dr Javid says they spent six hours discussing 
me! Perhaps more than any politician he understood the political implications if I did not survive.   One day, as Sher Zaman and two of his brothers were on their way to the land, 
they were ambushed by his uncle and some of his men.   
We used to hold competitions for who would collect the most toffees.   

On the last day of February 2008 I was in the kitchen when we heard an enormous blast.   Among them was 
Winston Churchill, who wrote a book about it, and we still call one of the peaks Churchills Picket 
even though he was not very complimentary about our people.   He had the chance 
to be the hero of history but didnt take it, she said.   This time all anyone talked about was how bad the food was.   I thought if anyone attacked me 
it would be on those steps.   What kind of mullah is he? Hes driving us crazy.   Even so my father insisted on starting the day in style by singing the national anthem.   The journey usually took about five 
hours as long as the road had not been washed away by rains or landslides, and the Flying Coach left 
early in the morning.   

At school people started talking about the diary.   
What you did was wrong, Malala, she said.   There are many stories that Lord Buddha himself came here because it is a 
place of such peace, and some of his ashes are said to be buried in the valley in a giant stupa.   Moniba was devastated and the whole town was in shock.   They called themselves Martyrs for 
Benazir.   The more interviews I gave, the stronger I felt and the more 
support we received.   

They know no one will ask the manager, said my father.   
To motivate students in all provinces he was giving cash awards to girls and boys who scored well in 
their exams.   I was on the way to meet him with my parents when 
we were approached by a short man who was frantically talking on two different phones.   The militants would enter villages with megaphones and the police would flee.   Before then mullahs had almost been figures of fun my father said at wedding parties 
they would just hang around in a corner and leave early but under Zia they became influential and 
were called to Islamabad for guidance on sermons.   But they 
are from different tribes so their love causes a war.   



My father consulted my mother on everything.   If any of his children accidentally spilt their food he would fly into a rage.   My fathers elder 
brother Saeed Ramzan had worked for years as a teacher at a local school.   People would visit to pray 
for spiritual guidance, cures for their ailments and even happy marriages for their children.   Then we remembered General Abbas and his visiting card.   

It was while he was visiting one afternoon in September 2001 that there was a great commotion 
and other people started arriving.   We ate at restaurants and had our first visit to a McDonalds.   So Madam Maryam and I wrote an email to General Abbas explaining the situation.   So when my father announced his 
desire to ask for the hand of my mother, Tor Pekai, it was clear neither side would welcome the 
marriage.   Even today, when 
most of the foreign aid agencies have gone, shattered buildings still line the roadside and people are 
still waiting for compensation from the government to build new houses, the JuD banners and helpers 
are still present.   Even if I have to 
live in the deserts of the Sahara, I need her eyes open; I wont be able to live without her.   

I asked Usman Bhai Jan to tell us a joke while we were waiting for two teachers to arrive.   We passed nine resolutions 
calling for an end to child labour and asking for help to send the disabled and street children to 
school, as well as for the reconstruction of all the schools destroyed by the Taliban.   On the walls were photographs of all our army 
chiefs, the most powerful men in our country including dictators like Musharraf and scary Zia.   My 
father fired him, but some other teachers were worried and sent a delegation to his office.   Up there we were higher than the rocky peaks all around us.   Their militants kidnapped 
policemen and ransacked government buildings.   We also competed in what we call board exams.   Shame 
is a very terrible thing for a Pashtun man.   Fazlullah was made 
chief of the Swat sector.   General Kayani asked Dr Javid whether I should be sent abroad or not.   

It is my belief God sends the solution first and the problem later, replied Dr Javid.   

Lots of buildings were surrounded by concrete blocks, and there were checkpoints for incoming 
vehicles to guard against suicide bombs.   

We were not fans of the Taliban as we had heard they destroyed girls schools and blew up giant 
Buddha statues we had many Buddhas of our own that we were proud of.   

My father was bewildered by all the people gathered outside politicians, government dignitaries, 
provincial ministers who had come to show their sympathy.   The fruit of our apricot tree might be eaten by someone else 
this year.  One year ago I left my home for school and never returned.   Because of the curfew and the checkpoints there was not one other 
vehicle on the road that didnt belong to the military.   He was a great hero of my father for his fight against apartheid.   I dont want keys, I want my daughter! my mother cried.   



Some of Jinnahs most famous speeches were displayed.   The president of the students group in Jehanzeb College was Ihsan ulHaq 
Haqqani.   

He laughed a lot, but as a boy he had been so selfconscious about being darkskinned that he went 
to the fields to get buffalo milk to spread on his face, thinking it would make him lighter.   If there is an entry there has to be an exit, he 
said.   In our culture, if someone dies women come to the home of the 
deceased and the men to the hujra not just family and close friends but everyone from the 
neighbourhood.   Few people knew where they 
were going, they just knew they had to leave.   What you are doing is wrong.   The 
government promised they would all be looked after by the state, but that felt as empty as most 
government promises.   My father was 
teacher, accountant and principal.   My mother is not 
easily scared and remained composed.   The Quran says we should seek knowledge, 
study hard and learn the mysteries of our world.   Shortly 
after that we were told a man who had completed a peace walk from Dera Ismail Khan was coming 
through Mingora and we wanted to welcome him.   

The talib talked of jihad in such glorious terms that my father was captivated.   

Some people even claimed the video was fake.   I think when there is a great disaster or our lives are in danger we remember our 
sins and wonder how we will meet God and whether we will be forgiven.   When our bus hit a pothole on the way back my brother 
Khushal, who had been asleep, jerked awake.   That day instead of a story he did a magic trick to make a 
pebble disappear.   We timed our prayers by the shadow on the mountains.   



My father could listen no more.   What skin 
cream are you using? I asked her.   Everything was silent, pindrop silent.   People used to say both Zahid Khan and my father were on the 
Taliban radar and both would be killed; the only thing they didnt know was which would be killed 
first.   My father was out a lot as he was 
busy, not just with his school, but also with literary societies and jirgas, as well as trying to save the 
environment, trying to save our valley.   I am only one small man 


The Autumn of the Earthquake 



One fine October day when I was still in primary school our desks started to tremble and shake.   They borrowed 30,000 rupees 
more to repaint the building, rented a shack across the road to live in and went from door to door 
trying to find students.   And I almost gave the game away in one entry when I said, My 
mother liked my pen name Gul Makai and joked to my father we should change my name .   Dr Fiona was about to leave for the airport to fly back to Birmingham her bags were already at 
the airport but when she heard the news, she offered to help and two nurses from her hospital in 
Birmingham stayed on with her.   
Shiza introduced us to women who were lawyers and doctors and also activists, which showed us 
that women could do important jobs yet still keep their culture and traditions.   We were wet and filthy by the time we got home.   Not because of girls like me and my school but because our 
country has more than 200 nuclear warheads and they were worried about who was going to control 
them.   Even so, it all seemed far, far away from our peaceful garden valley.   Someone who is 
against America, against the Pakistan establishment, against English law, he has been infected by the 
Taliban.   

My father was scared and my uncle kept saying, Be very careful some of these people might be 
secret agents.   Isnt it a miracle you all 
happened to be here when Malala was shot? said my father.   My father remembers that one 
day a maulana called Sufi Mohammad came to the village and asked young men to join him to fight 
the Russians in the name of Islam.   Some of them, his friends and sympathisers, were very upset, 
but he felt that others were jealous of our high profile and believed we had got what was coming to 
us.   Eighty people were killed including boys 
as young as twelve, some of whom had come from Swat.   My father became even more disturbed.   My mother was sitting on the floor pounding 
spices, brightly coloured turmeric and cumin, filling the air with their aroma.   The visits became 
more frequent after my father and the Swat Qaumi Jirga held a meeting in our school to protest against 
army plans for the people of Mingora and our community defence committees to conduct night 
patrols.   If there was any left she fed it to the birds.   

We have a special history too.   She became a good friend of mine 
and of Monibas, which sometimes caused fights as three is a tricky number.   All the principals from the 
meeting had arrived at the hospital and there were scores of media and activists; it seemed the whole 
town was there.   

The hospital had been put on complete lockdown.   The brides would wear exquisite clothes and be draped in gold, necklaces 
and bangles given by both sides of the family.   

As we got older the village began to seem boring.   One day Hidayatullah came back from trying to 
enrol pupils to find my father sitting in the office talking about advertising with the local head of 
Pakistan TV As soon as the man had gone, Hidayatullah burst into laughter.   

And it was hard to believe it was all over! More than a thousand ordinary people and police had 
been killed.   

Soon the house was full of women.   I wore more fashionable clothes and didnt cover my 
face even when I became a teenager.   He introduced himself as an Islamic reformer and an 
interpreter of the Quran.   It was as different for us as Islamabad is to New York.   

The village was a forgotten place.   

In Mardan there were already big camps of white UNHCR tents like those for Afghan refugees in 
Peshawar.   He vowed to 
end corruption and go after those guilty of plundering and looting the national wealth.   
Sending in the regular army was a tough decision.   

The general replied in a very military way.   He said, You 
are a child and it s your right to speak.   We have lost so many of the precious lives of our soldiers and this is due to 
your negligence.   I dont think that Paulo Coelho had come across the Taliban or our useless politicians.   My parents had 
not held one for me because they could not afford the goat and rice needed to feed the guests, and my 
grandfather would not help them out because I was not a boy.   Hill station resorts like Malam Jabba, 
Madyan and Bahrain were devastated, their hotels and bazaars in ruins.   They were most likely killed, 
but as there is no proof of death, their wives cant be declared widows.   Like my father he was very outspoken and had been threatened 
too.   We would speak for half an hour or 
forty five minutes in Urdu, even though we are both Pashtun, as the blog was to appear in Urdu and he 
wanted the voice to be as authentic as possible.   Then Maryam would say, 
Malala, Malala.   Many students argued that the book 
should be banned and burned and the fatwa upheld.   But 
she is like my second mother.   

On 27 December Benazir Bhutto addressed an election rally in Liaquat Bagh, the park in 
Rawalpindi where our first prime minister, Liaquat Ali, was assassinated.   My grandfather, Janser Khan, had been listening to Radio Afghanistan just 
before she was born and heard the name.   A suicide bomber had struck in the basketball court at 
Haji Baba High School.   
In the town of Muzaffarabad in Azad Kashmir the JuD even set up a large field hospital with Xray 
machines, an operating theatre, a wellstocked pharmacy and a dental department.   My mother was away and Hidayatullah needed my father to help him move 
everything up to the first floor, safe from the fastrising waters, but he couldnt find him anywhere.   After some time they went to visit 
some tribes in Swat to win their support so they could return to Afghanistan.   This from a man 
who had lived so long in America! He insisted he would have his own education system.   You think I enter the school and take my clothes off? When you see a boy and a 
girl you see a scandal.   

We heard that thousands of people had been arrested including boys as young as eight who had 
been brainwashed to train for suicide bombing missions.   Can you sell them to me for ten 
rupees? she asked.   

They took me for another CT scan.   But then they went ahead and closed our school and I felt embarrassed.   They 
had three children, and we liked them living with us as we all played cops and robbers on the roof.   I am confused, 
Aba, I told my father.   At first he 
thought it might be a brick factory, but as he approached he saw bearded figures in turbans burning 
TVs and computers.   In our village there was a widow called Soraya who married a 
widower from another clan which had a feud with her family.   Even in Islamabad buildings collapsed.   None of them had ever been on a helicopter.   Some fifty men deserted from the Frontier Corps and another fortyeight were 
captured and then paraded around.   My father laughed and said I should go into politics.   It was so watery that one girl said, The sky could be 
seen in the soupy curry.   He described what was happening in Afghanistan as a war 
between two elephants the US and the Soviet Union not our war, and said that we Pashtuns were 
like the grass crushed by the hooves of two fierce beasts.   I am staying here.   

Afterwards, we found out that despite his youthful appearance he had been a neurosurgeon for 
thirteen years and was the most experienced and decorated neurosurgeon in the Pakistani army.   

By the end of 2008, around 400 schools had been destroyed by the Taliban.   I had no idea what New York and America were.   In Pakistan we dont have a culture of honouring people while they 
are alive, only the dead, so he thought it was a bad omen.   We 
must get her to hospital.   

Those who could, stayed in the homes of local people or with family and friends.   There was no sound from the river or the wind; even 
the birds were not chirping.   It was as if everyone had been waiting for 
someone else to start.   My father tells me even before I could talk I would 
toddle into classes and talk as if I was a teacher.   

Fazlullahs group was not the only one causing havoc.   He appealed to all Swatis to return.   Usman Bhai Jan, our driver, made us laugh 
as usual.   

Pashruns are famously frugal (though generous with guests), and Baba was particularly careful with 
money.   It 
was risky but it was the only ambition I had back then.   

My mother was excited to be in Mingora.   He also thought armed guards would 
alarm the parents of the students at school, and he didnt want to put others at risk.   We wont give him the building but be careful.   I walked off with two other girls she didnt 
like.   

It took weeks of back and forth between Washington and Islamabad, or rather army headquarters in 
Rawalpindi, before the case was finally resolved.   They cleaned and bandaged the wound.   One of our neighbours told us he 
had even seen them leaving the bodies of dead Taliban in the streets for all to see.   And many women have no 
education at all.   Dont support Talibanisation, its inhuman.   

It was 24 July 2009, a week after our prime minister had announced that the Taliban had been 
cleared out.   The party had been close to General Zia and done 
badly in the elections.   At the end of the pass is a greendomed 
shrine where people throw coins to give thanks for their safe arrival.   People across Pakistan were glued to a 
series on primetime TV called Beyond the Call of Duty, which was supposed to consist of reallife 
stories of soldiers battling militants in Swat.   

His only precaution was to change his routine.   There was the one about people of all 
religions being free to worship in the new Pakistan.   Now the Talibanisation is especially for us, for those like you and me 
who continue to speak out.   

We stayed in my mothers village, Karshat, with my uncle Faiz Mohammad and his family.   Initially Madam Maryams younger sister Ayesha agreed, but her father found out and refused 
his permission saying it was too risky.   Faqir had a $200,000 bounty on his head yet there 
he was sitting in a government officials house having dinner.   I remembered what my father had said about taking a deep breath before starting, but then I 
saw that all eyes were on me and I rushed through.   
Their children are usually dirty and they are looked down upon by Pashtuns, even if they are poor 
themselves.   The crowds were so large that the bus moved at a walking pace.   The destruction 
of schools continued.   LeT had close links to the ISI and was set up to liberate Kashmir, which we believe should be 
part of Pakistan not India as its population is mostly Muslim.   

The school was not far from my home and I used to walk, but since the start of last year I had been 
going with other girls in a rickshaw and coming home by bus.   They became voluntary IDPs.   Hidayatullah was one of the first to call.   Then an anonymous letter came to our house 
addressed to my father.   It was my grandmothers 
faith in my father that gave him the courage to find his own proud path he could travel along.   
Though Afghans are renowned fighters, Colonel Imam, the officer heading the programme, 
complained that trying to organise them was like weighing frogs.   
Afterwards I went on as many radio and TV channels as possible.   You saved this womans husband but not your own house! he said.   They 
retreated after just twelve days and reached what they called a negotiated peace settlement with 
local militant leaders like Nek Mohammad.   
For many in the remote areas it was the first time they had seen a foreigner.   When he appeared in court even lawyers 
showered him with rose petals.   There was 
so much damage that it cost my father 90,000 rupees to repair equivalent to the monthly fees for 
ninety students.   Fazlullah hated the Bollywood movies we so 
loved, which he denounced as unIslamic.   Once we were settled I started going to school with her.   After that I doublechecked all the locks every night.   On Pakistans fiftieth anniversary on 14 August 1997 there were parades and 
commemorations throughout the country.   

How can we do that? I replied.   I was astonished to see so many channels.   Though he and my father were great rivals, they admired each other and later became 
friends.   But I had no idea where 
I was.   People were bitterly disappointed and started abusing him What did that devil say? 
people asked.   Foreign governments pointed out that most of our politicians werent 
paying any income tax, so it was a bit much to ask hardpressed taxpayers in their own countries to 
contribute.   The women would gather 
at the house of the dead mans wife or mother and a terrible wailing would start and echo round the 
valley, which made my skin crawl.   In colonial times our 
kings owed allegiance to the British but ruled their own land.   Eucalyptus blossom blew into the house, 
coating everything white, and the wind carried the pungent smell of the rice fields.   They used the big hall in the mosque, where they taught more than a 
hundred children ranging from five to fifteen years old.   Sometimes when I 
walked along the main road I saw chalked messages on the sides of buildings, contact us for jihad 
training, they would say, listing a phone number to call.   But 
we soon found out that the Americans had gone it alone.   It does not matter what language you choose, the important 
thing is the words you use to express yourself.   He 
called back with bad news they had been left everywhere, though most shopkeepers had ignored 
them and thrown them away.   This was 
different and very much like the holidays we read about in novels.   I asked, Two or three months ago you told us 
Fazlullah and his deputy were shot and injured, and then you said they were in Swat and sometimes 
you say theyre in Afghanistan.   Suddenly there was a lot of optimism about the future.   Later her diary was published and is a very powerful record.   The point is we are a Taliban state.   Finally I would be able to return to school 
without fear.   We couldnt 
believe the army had been oblivious to bin Laden s whereabouts.   A young man came in and introduced himself as Colonel Junaid, a 
neurosurgeon.   She can hear you even if you think she cant.   We were told she had committed 
suicide, but we later discovered her own family had poisoned her.   If he accidentally drew a snake he 
could erase it and the snake would disappear.   Tuition at Jehanzeb was free but my father needed money 
to live on.   

As we crossed the Malakand Pass I saw a young girl selling oranges.   Many of his classes were taught under a tree 
on the bare ground.   

To try to get people at home to support him, General Zia launched a campaign of Islamisation to 
make us a proper Muslim country with the army as the defenders of our countrys ideological as well 
as geographical frontiers.   A woman filmmaker in Islamabad got hold of it and it 
was shown on Pakistan TV over and over, and then round the world.  30 a.   

Maybe they have poor eyesight, we laughed, and cant see them.   We will defeat the forces 
of extremism and militancy with the power of the people, she declared to loud cheers.   

Yet my father remained hopeful and believed there would be a day when there was an end to the 
destruction.   Both things are false! replied my father.   I have had such dreams since the launch 
of the military operation in Swat.   There are two powers 
in the world; one is the sword and the other is the pen.   Tell me how can one 
live without daughters, he sobbed.   I knew these 
were very small steps.   As a boy 
in Karachi he would study by the glow of street lights because there was no light at home.   Unfortunately the demand for English tuition turned out to be low, and there 
were unexpected drains on their income.   

I know my mother didnt like the awards because she feared I would become a target as I was 
becoming more well known.   The 
hospital could not cope with all the patients and had to erect big tents outside to treat people.   The strangest sight of all was the bus station.   Sometimes I sat on the roof too, watching the smoke rise from 
the cooking fires all around and listening to the nightly racket of the crickets.   For a while my father did this but stopped 
when he realised that although a falcon flies high it is a cruel bird.   These are bad days.   She had hit him so hard 
that when she looked at the shoe it was broken.   We should not kill her.   Fingers were even pointed at my father.   You are as vulnerable and as wanted a target as he is.   As the tremors 
continued they had spent the entire day outdoors and then the night too, huddling together for warmth, 
even though it was bitterly cold in the mountains.   There were 
children in the laps of adults and smaller children in their laps.   To get him 
released she walked forty miles alone over mountains to appeal to a powerful cousin.   Above the nurses station 
the clock showed it was just after 5 p.   

I had amassed a lot of money by the end of that year half a million rupees each from the prime 
minister, the chief minister of Punjab, the chief minister of our state Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the 
Sindh government.   Atal was only five then and really loved that rabbit so it used to 
sleep under my parents bed.   The new partners 
again went from door to door, telling people they had started a new kind of school.   He made Afghanistan a rallying point not only for the West, which wanted to stop the 
spread of communism from the Soviet Union, but also for Muslims from Sudan to Tajikistan, who saw 
it as a fellow Islamic country under attack from infidels.   

Its the same old story, my father said, and he was right.   The Americans 
said he had been tipped off and escaped.   
In a city of twenty million people is there not one person who will take this down? 

There was one important place we had to include in our visit to Karachi besides our outings to the 
sea or the huge bazaars, where my mother bought lots of clothes.   Its ridiculous, my father would say, that this socalled 
scholar is spreading ignorance.   
The assembly was elected for a year and we met almost every month.   His body was found dumped in his familys ancestral graveyard.   Moving me a foreign minor to the Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital was not a simple exercise, and Bolger soon found himself tangled in the hoops of British and 
Pakistani bureaucracy.   I was not nervous though my father tried to 
intimidate me by saying Prime Minister Gilani came from a family of saints.   But two years after I was born the generals again took over.   

She laughed and said, We are all three good friends.   Children sometimes froze to death in winter.   My parents never once suggested I 
should withdraw from school, ever.   I played Romeo as a civil servant interviewing people for a job.   I noticed my father was not very happy with this.   We have a saying, Without honour, the world counts for 
nothing We fight and feud among ourselves so much that our word for cousin tarbur is the same 
as our word for enemy.   One night in November 2009 he had had a very narrow escape.   At school that day everyone was subdued, even those who had opposed Benazir.   

We had begun to think about other things besides the Taliban, but it wasnt possible to forget 
completely.   We went to the primary 
school where there was more space to run around and played cops and robbers.   But 
first we need to educate our girls so they can become teachers! 

One day Sufi Mohammad proclaimed from jail that there should be no education for women even at 
girls madrasas.   

For us girls that doorway was like a magical entrance to our own special world.   On some 
mosques they set up speakers connected to radios so his broadcasts could be heard by everyone in the 
village and in the fields.   He 
brought her to the hospital on the back of his motorbike, something very rare for a respectable Pashtun 
woman.   He was at an important gathering of about 400 principals who had come 
from all over Swat to protest against plans by the government to impose a central regulatory authority.   My mind transports 
me back to my school and there I am reunited with my friends and teachers.   
But all this time the mufti was watching.   I 
wanted to write my fathers phone number.   
Around three and a half million people had lost their homes.   Seduced, killed and blamed.   Some of the khans fled.   It was such a big expanse, 
surely no one could know where it ended.   My mother cried, but my father tried to comfort her as he felt I 
was now out of danger.   Although my condition had been stabilised 
it was felt that I needed to be moved within fortyeight hours, seventytwo at the most.   We heard there were thousands of missing all over Pakistan.   

After a couple of rulers who did not work out, in 1917 the chiefs settled on a man called Miangul 
Abdul Wadood as their king.   It was strange to think that Bangladesh was once part of Pakistan 
despite being a thousand miles away.   Its in the Kana 
dara, which is enclosed by craggy mountain walls and so narrow there is not even room for a cricket 
ground.   He started to sleep at one of his friends 
houses to protect us in case the Taliban came for him.   Leave me, for Gods sake! I am a woman, a Muslim.   I prayed to God every night to give me strength.   Every morning I would stand against it to check 
if I had grown.   Some of us spoke out against what was happening in our valley.   I never noticed before how beautiful her eyes 
are, said Maryam.   My father also kept telling them to hide the cameras.   In our house my mother managed everything because my father was so busy.   The 
army seemed much more effective at PR than our politicians.   My father always says that heroism 
is in the Pashtun DNA.   No Pashtun leaves his land of his own sweet will, she would say.   President Obama 
was very happy, and on TV we watched big celebrations take place outside the White House.   He felt ashamed but had no choice if he didnt want to end up illiterate.   Soon everyone seemed to be talking about the radio station.   I 
think it was then that Adam decided he should focus on me.   Jinnah said, No 
struggle can ever succeed without women participating side by side with men.   He became a perfect talib.  6 on the 
Richter Scale and was felt as far away as Kabul and Delhi.   My father had 
turned his weakness into strength.   You were the one who said if we believe in something greater 
than our lives, then our voices will only multiply even if we are dead.   My fathers friends had arrived with news that was hard to 
believe.   
We had been left with no choice but to get involved in politics and campaign for education.   We did not realise then that 9/11 would change our world 
too, and would bring war into our valley.   People would 
say they were two sides of the same coin.   He himself had been a political prisoner as well as a close ally of Benazir.   

That night my father spoke on Geo TV and told Kamran Khan that people had had high hopes but 
were disappointed.   Am I 
the only person who can fetch it? he wondered.   

As the day went on and the sun climbed higher in the sky, more and more of the White Mountain 
would be bathed in golden sun.   What we knew and they didnt was that 
the mufti s own niece attended the school in secret.   We have no reliable electricity 
supply.   

The streets were jampacked.   Landslides blocked access to the worst affected 
parts and all the phones and power lines were down.   

It was only when she met my father that she felt regret.   

I am only human, and when I heard the guns my heart used to beat very fast.   We raced around, building snowmen and snow bears and trying to catch 



snowflakes.   I was only 
eleven years old and already I wished it could.   
Sometimes there was a boy called Haroon with them, who was a year older than me and used to live 
on our street.   We call our village Shahpur, but really there is a necklace of three villages along the bottom 
of the valley Shahpur, the biggest; Barkana, where my father grew up; and Karshat, which is where 
my mother lived.   When I complained about my 
books my brothers whined about their chickens.   
They destroyed an entire brigade, one of the worst defeats in the history of the British army.   After that I spoke of my namesake, Malalai of Maiwand, who had 
strength and power equal to hundreds and thousands of brave men because her few lines of poetry 
changed everything so the British were defeated.   We stayed there for a week and to my joy I 



heard Moniba was also in Abbottabad, as was one of our teachers and another friend.   

The night before we hardly slept because we were so excited.   At that time I was unhappy with my family, but 
later I was grateful as it made me more independent.   My father told him he had just finished school and had won a 
college place at Jehanzeb.   A khans daughter cant marry a barbers son and a 
barbers daughter cant marry a khans son.   I went with him.   I agreed.   

That morning we arrived in the narrow mud lane off Haji Baba Road in our usual procession of 
brightly painted rickshaws, sputtering diesel fumes, each one crammed with five or six girls.   You could see them openly collecting contributions and recruiting men.   He did not mention he could not afford to take it as he did not want to 
embarrass his father.   They even camped on the golf course, their big guns trained on 
the hillsides.   Education is neither Eastern nor Western, it is human.   It wasnt the best of days to start 
with as it was the middle of school exams, though as a bookish girl I didnt mind them as much as 
some of my classmates.   One day Ahmad Shah received a warning from unknown 
people that they would kill him, so for a while he left for Islamabad to try to raise awareness there of 
what was happening to our valley.   My father came from a backward village yet through education 
and force of personality he made a good living for us and a name for himself.   In August we had our first case of cholera in Mingora and soon there was a tent of patients 
outside the hospital.   

I would listen rapt as he told stories of warring tribes, Pashtun leaders and saints, often through 
poems that he read in a melodious voice, crying sometimes as he read.   Fazlullah could now carry out his threats and mobilise support 
for his Taliban in the name of Lai Masjid.   
Yaseem told them he felt proud to prepare my familys food.   

Our school bell rang again for the first time on 1 August.   After this the road winds back down for a while then follows the 
Ghwurban River and peters out into a rocky track.   
All Pashtun children grow up with the story of how Malalai inspired the Afghan army to defeat the 
British in 1880 in one of the biggest battles of the Second Anglo Afghan War.   I was in Year 5 and some of us pretended we were younger than we were.   The women said the missing men had not collaborated with the Taliban; maybe 
they had given them a glass of water or some bread when theyd been ordered to do so.   I went and whispered Quranic verses over the books to try and protect 
them.   I could not sleep until he returned and I could lock the gate.   Zahid Khan was returning to his 
home from a meeting with army officials at Circuit House late at night when he was ambushed.   He was a scary man with dark panda shadows around his eyes, large teeth that seemed to 
stand to attention and hair pomaded flat on his head.   

In the school my father told the people, I saw your villagers burning these things.   When they went in to see him he had two 
televisions on, one tuned to a local channel in Urdu and the other to Sky News in English, with news 
of my shooting.   My family and I sat on the rocks, 
gazing across the water, breathing in the salt tang of the Arabian Sea.   It was a bitterly cold night in January but 150 people gathered.   People liked this as justice was 
speedy, unlike in Pakistani courts, where you could wait years and have to pay bribes to be heard.   

There was less foreign help than there might have been at another time.   It was 
wonderful that my friends wanted to share in my success.   

His friend Hidayatullah told him to stand firm.   Around the time of Shabanas murder every day seemed like the 
worst day; every moment was the worst.   They are 
now refugees and theyre living with us.   Her brother 
had been picked up by the army, put in leg irons and tortured, and then kept in a fridge until he died.   She 
begged my grandmother to start praying immediately.   You are the ones educating their children 

He soon became president of the organisation and expanded it until it included 400 principals.   First our 
father and family, then our street, then our whole mohalla, then all Swat.   

That morning had begun like any other, though a little later than usual.   Did you do 
anything against Islam? Did you do anything immoral? No.   

Adam was astonished.   So people 
wouldnt think I was getting special treatment, my father arranged for us to do papers at another 
school, that of his friend Ahmad Shah.   
On the way he saw smoke so high it touched the clouds, the blackest smoke hed ever seen.   The nurses werent telling me 
anything.   Fortunately at this point 
the ruling family of the United Arab Emirates stepped in.   The army was sending them to a special 
camp for jihadis to deradicalise them.   Whats wrong with you people? he asked Irfan and my father.   The 
vehicle we were in even had to pass through an explosives check before we could head up the 
Malakand Pass.   Local people had no idea what it was back then we did not know that the 
Americans could do such a thing.   

About a week later the army came to Swat, making lots of noise with their jeeps and helicopters.   Lets put out the flames of 
militancy before they reach here.   

I have a solution, said my father.   Unlike Moniba, 
who has straight hair, mine is wavy, and I liked to twist it into curls or tie it into plaits.   It was fun 
learning how to report issues properly.   Maybe they had even shot at people through that hole.   

When I stand in front of my window and look out, I see tall buildings, long roads full of vehicles 
moving in orderly lines, neat green hedges and lawns, and tidy pavements to walk on.   He 
was hoping to build a political consensus behind launching an allout attack on the Taliban.   He made us all laugh with 
his crazy stories.   



Is he right, Aba? I asked my father.   

My father shares everything with my mother and there was no way he would keep such a thing 
secret.   When her father called, my father cried.   Her own family would not take her back because it is believed that a woman who has 
left her husband has brought shame on her family.   They had travelled from all over the country and many of them 
were carrying small children.   The 
militants fled to the forests and by early December the army said they had cleared most areas.   Look, Ziauddin, he said.   We can sit by and hope the government will help but they wont.   
My favourite programme was Shaka Laka Boom Boom, an Indian childrens series about a boy called 
Sanju who has a magic pencil.   They had jogging shoes or 
cheap plastic sandals on their feet, and sometimes stockings over their heads with holes for their eyes, 
and they blew their noses dirtily into the ends of their turbans.   These two are spreading secularism and should be killed, it said.   Dont take any more risks! 

Finally Zahid Khan was transferred to Peshawar to be operated on and my father came home.   Whenever my grandmother saw me speaking on television, or 
leaving the house she would pray, Please God make Malala like Benazir Bhutto but do not give her 
Benazirs short life.   We were 
often joined by my fathers friend Zahid Khan, a fellow member of the Swat Qaumi Jirga.   Khalida had 
been sold into marriage to an old man who used to beat her, and eventually she ran away with her 
three daughters.   The back 
where we sat had no windows, just thick plastic sheeting at the sides which flapped and was too 
yellowed and dusty to see through.   
He began speaking against school administrators and congratulating girls by name who left school.   They were forcing men to grow beards as long 
as a lantern and women to wear burqas.   Then vice versa.   There was a plum tree in our front yard which 
gave the most delicious fruit.   Amazingly three 
quarters of all the IDPs were put up by the people of Mar dan and the nearby town of Swabi.   To represent the Taliban they had Muslim Khan, who 
wasnt in the studio.   One of the wives was from Swat! 

The Seals had shot bin Laden in the head and his body had been flown out by helicopter.   But though their sacrifice was supposed to have restored government 
control, we were still waiting for the rule of law.   I was 
upset and recalled how different my eleventh birthday had been.   And on and on it goes.   He said they 
had told him, Either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists, and threatened to bomb us back 
to the Stone Age if we stood against them.   Spring was when Swat was at its greenest.   
There were balloons and I had made the same wish I was making on my twelfth birthday, but this time 
there was no cake and there were no candles to blow out.   Even the Pakistan media, which has been so soft on you till now, is 
outraged.   Im no less than Malala.   In the morning when my father was given 
cream or milk, his sisters were given tea with no milk.   Dont worry, we 
will sort everything out, he said.   My father wrote a poem, The 
Relics of Butkara, which summed up perfectly how temple and mosque could exist side by side: 
When the voice of truth rises from the minarets,/ The Buddha smiles,/ And the broken chain of 
history reconnects.   One girl commanded, L Assaan bash! or 
Stand at ease! and we clicked our heels and responded, Allah.   But then he started up again.   The Quran teaches us sabar patience but often it feels that we have 
forgotten the word and think Islam means women sitting at home in purdah or wearing burqas while 
men do jihad.   The mosque also set up its 
own courts to dispense Islamic justice, saying the state had failed.   

The mullah looked down embarrassed because greeting someone properly is important in Islam.   But it seemed they were too late.   On the steps outside an old man was selling popcorn.   

My cousin Reena came into my room They knew you were stealing, she said.   You should be more like Malala and do other 
things, said Madam Maryam Its just as important as your education.   

My mother was in a state of shock and could not understand why the doctors were not operating to 
remove the bullet.   

Inside Dr Afcals van my father was talking to the media, giving a running commentary on the 
exodus from the valley.   The local commander, General 



Iftikhar, stormed the control tower at Karachi so that Musharraf s plane could land.   Are you my friend or Ridas? I asked Moniba.   One theory was that the devastation had been 
created by the Americans using something called HAARP (High Frequency Active Auroral Research 
Program) technology, which causes huge waves under the ocean, thus flooding our land.   It 
was almost as if they thought Fazlullah would recreate our old princely state from the time of the 
wali.   Malala is of Maiwand and shes the happiest person in the whole 
world.   It could hardly have been a 
bloodier beginning.   I spoke of the irony 
of the Taliban wanting female teachers and doctors for women yet not letting girls go to school to 
qualify for these jobs.   

My father kept insisting to everyone in a few days we will return.   We dont 
want her to become shaheed millat [a martyr of the nation] like Liaquat Ali Khan.   
Sometimes a plywood coffin would be brought back from one of the mines.   They can stop us going to school 
but they cant stop us learning, I said.   You have put the first stone in standing water, they 
said.   Our army, which already had a lot of strange side businesses, like factories making 
cornflakes and fertilisers, had started producing soap operas.   Dont tell Aba, I begged.   My mother had had enough of the gunfire and tension and called Dr Afzal and begged him to 
persuade my father to leave.   Moniba had the most beautiful 
writing and presentation of the three of us, but I always told her she did not trust herself enough.   If they did not, he said, this would expose them for what 
they really were.   He told them that nowhere in Islam is this required.   In their bubble inside the hospital they did not realise that my story had travelled all round the 
world and that people were calling for me to be sent abroad for treatment.   On the way a boy on a bicycle crashed into me 
and my left shoulder hurt so much that my eyes watered.   He said they had attempted to rob him.   My mother put it best.   He promised that the gas supply had been restored and that the banks were reopening, and 
called on the people of Swat to return.   But the image of America in Pakistan had become of one of drones, secret 
raids on our territory and Raymond Davis.   He explained that 
the children would sell what they had sorted to a garbage shop for a few rupees.   When it suits the Taliban, women can be vocal and visible.   My father had taken down the Khushal School sign and left it in the courtyard.   

The diary of Gul Makai received attention further afield.   It must be 
Malala! they said.   You take one or two minutes to utter just one sentence.   We needed peace whoever brought it.   The same is happening with Bajaur.   
These were no longer just about stopping people cutting down trees but were also about education 
and democracy.   I kept seeing the dirty face of the girl from the dump and 
continued to pester my father to give them places at our school.   The next 
morning we learned that masked militants had entered the Sangota Convent School for girls and the 
Excelsior College for boys and blown them up using improvised explosive devices (IEDs).   One of the few people who spoke out for Asia Bibi in Pakistan was the governor of Punjab, 
Salman Taseer.   Then he insisted and I started to weep.   My father wanted us to be inspired by our 
great hero, but in a manner fit for our times with pens, not swords.   She was nervous about going to Peshawar, 
which has become a nogo area for foreigners, but when she heard that I was a campaigner for girls 
education she was happy to help as she herself had been lucky to go to a good school and train to 
become a doctor.   They 
are very conservative and most of our madrasas are Deobandi.   Even my father forgot, he was so busy hopping about.   Not 
everyone wanted to as they said the children were dirty and probably diseased, and their parents 
would not like them going to school with children like that.   We saw 
the Red Mosque where the siege had taken place, the wide, wide Constitution Avenue leading to the 
whitecolonnaded buildings of the Parliament House and the Presidency, where Zardari now lived.   As far as he could see, I was medically dead.   So when Naeem lost his job after a dispute with the college 
administration, they decided to start their own school.   They helped 
clear and rebuild destroyed villages as well as leading prayers and burying bodies.   That was the start of what my father calls the 
Arabisation of Pakistan.   Liberal 
progressives like him did not enjoy the singing and chanting.   To try and boost 
their income they ran a tuck shop at school, going off in the mornings and buying snacks to sell to the 
children.   Dr Farooq was an Islamic scholar and former member of the JamaateIslami party, 



and as one of the biggest voices against Talibanisation he had even issued a fatwa against suicide 
attacks.   

Their leader was Maulana Fazlullah, a 28yearold who used to operate the pulley chair to cross 
the Swat River and whose right leg dragged because of childhood polio.   

One day my brothers were not home and my mother had asked me to throw away some potato peel 
and eggshells.   Even my 
grandfather was proud.   I have a school, but I am neither a khan nor a political leader.   They dont accept our 
saints and shrines many Pakistanis are also mystical people and gather at Sufi shrines to dance and 
worship.   I dont remember any more.   

Earthquake victims praised the activists who had trudged up and down mountains and through 
shattered valleys carrying medical help to remote regions no one else had bothered with.   Since that day I have never lied or stolen.   

Now you can get back to school work, said Madam Maryam as we finished off the cake.   

Dr Fiona said it was likely I would have a speech impediment and a weak right arm and right leg, 
so I would need extensive rehabilitation facilities, which Pakistan didnt have.   We received other shocking news.   Ignorance allowed politicians to fool people and 
bad administrators to be reelected.   Whatever you thought about Nek Mohammad, we were not at war 
with the Americans and were shocked that they would launch attacks from the sky on our soil.   Soon they had 
taken over many villages.  .   
Then MMA activists launched attacks on cinemas and tore down billboards with pictures of women 
or blacked them out with paint.   

Then it was Sufi Mohammads turn.   We needed to visit the mausoleum of 
our founder and great leader Mohammad Ali Jinnah.   

I admired his mind, she says.   

Some of our teachers stopped coming to school.   My father heard that many of the boys were taken in by the JuD and housed in 
their madrasas.   But it used to wee everywhere so that night we put it outside.   Traffic Taliban, we joked to try and 
keep our spirits up.   My Malala, my Malala, my mother wailed and Maryam joined her.   

Many families live in walled compounds with watchtowers so they can keep an eye out for their 
enemies.   Everyone was in a 
continuous state of anxiety.   She had a little money of her own so they 
used it to hire a van and she moved to Mingora.   I also stopped wearing jewellery because I asked myself, What are these 
baubles which tempt me? Why should I lose my character for a few metal trinkets? But I still feel 
guilty, and to this day I say sorry to God in my prayers.   The Americans were worried that their ally 
General Musharraf was too unpopular in Pakistan to be effective against the Taliban so they had 
helped broker an unlikely powersharing deal.   We have a funny sense of humour.   

Yet she too got angry with him once.   How dare the Taliban take away my basic right to education? I said.   The teachers told us 
examiners first looked at how much we had written, then presentation.   There was usually a note pinned to them saying something like, This is 
what happens to an army agent, or Do not touch this body until 11 a.   That first year they had boys and girls together, but by 
2004 the climate had changed so it was unthinkable to have girls and boys in the same class.   Normally there are new film releases for the 
holidays, but Fazlullah had closed the DVD shops.   Her voice was soft and 
her words were soothing, and I drifted back to sleep.   My father was disappointed 
when I didnt win but I pointed out to him that all I had done was speak out; we didnt have an 
organisation doing practical things like the award winners had.   He said it felt like a wall came down in his throat.   She smells the threat, my mother told 
my father.   Please take care of my daughter.   

A couple of weeks after that our school was asked to take part in the District Child Assembly 
Swat, which had been set up by the charity UNICEF and by the Khpal Kor (My Home) Foundation for 
orphans.   I was already missing the green of Swat.   Drip, drip, drip.   
Chinese explorers wrote stories of how there were 1,400 Buddhist monasteries along the banks of the 
River Swat, and the magical sound of temple bells would ring out across the valley.   My father always says, While Badshah Sahib brought peace, his son brought 
prosperity.   This means cat and is her name for me.   Dr Javid suggested 
Great Ormond Street in London, and specialist hospitals in Edinburgh and Glasgow.   He 
had been shot several times and his throat partly slit.   I didnt want to stop learning.   He went to visit the DC at his official residence and found him hosting what appeared to be a 
celebration of the Taliban takeover.   We Pashtuns see this as an auspicious sign.   It was shortly before the earthquake that Fazlullah had appeared in Imam 
Deri, a small village just a few miles outside Mingora on the other side of the Swat River, and set up 
his illegal radio station.   Tables were 
set up for the women to hand over their wedding bangles and necklaces and women queued up to do 
so or sent their sons.   I was also known for 
participating in everything badminton, drama, cricket, art, even singing, though I wasnt much good.   My father was in favour of this.   Our house has 
holes in the walls, and every plate and cup is cracked.   

Colonel Junaid and the hospital director were not pleased to see them.   Instead of celebrating each other, our four 
provinces struggle to get along.   I was 
in the back with my mother.   The new girls had horrible stories.   
When a villager complained to her that he was flirting with a girl living across the road, she defended 
him.   But they had 
come a long way and its hard for us as Pashtuns to refuse hospitality.   But by the middle of 2007 the situation was so bad that people 



began to worry the militants could take over the capital.   Her husband would not take her to the beach, 
and even if she had somehow slipped out of the house, she would not have been able to follow the 
signs to the sea because she could not read.   The doctor put a hand on his shoulder and 
reassured my father that I would be taken care of and he could trust him.   He and his family were going so they offered us a lift.   Their previous home had a mud roof which leaked in the rain and we had two spare 
rooms so they stayed with us for a nominal rent and their children went to our school for free.   One target of 



the Taliban were non governmental organisations or NGOs, which they said were antiIslam.   Children in the refugee camps were even given school textbooks produced by 
an American university which taught basic arithmetic through fighting.   

So I studied hard too.   My grandfather never bought him new books.   My valley, the Swat Valley, is a heavenly 
kingdom of mountains, gushing waterfalls and crystalclear lakes, welcome to paradise, it says on a 
sign as you enter the valley.   I did not know how to stop.   I think there was some problem with hygiene in that muddy place, says my father.   They didnt call themselves Taliban to start with and didnt look like the 
Afghan Taliban wed seen in pictures with their turbans and blackrimmed eyes.   You two always argue when theres an important occasion! 
they said.   

After that my father entered every competition in the district.   

Its coming here, my father warned.   Two hours ago, came the reply.   But my 
mother was very composed and courageous.   Sometimes I thought I heard 
footsteps behind me or imagined figures slipping into the shadows.   

Are you scared now? I asked my father.   We dumped our backpacks in our rooms then gathered for morning assembly under the 
sky, our backs to the mountains as we stood to attention.   Over loudspeakers they called for the girls to surrender.   Usually car journeys are an adventure for us children as we rarely go anywhere.   God, I entrust her to You, she said to the heavens.   One of our favourite things 
was going on school trips.   There were 
cigarette stubs and empty food wrappers all over the floor.   A girl is so sacred she should be in 
purdah, and so private that there is no ladys name in the Quran as God doesnt want her to be 
named.   I remember that inside the dyna it was hot and sticky.   

We were terribly worried about our family in Shangla, jammed between those narrow mountains.   They wore black badges which said 
shariat ya shahadat sharia law or martyrdom and sometimes black turbans, so people 
called them Tor Patki or the Black Turbaned Brigade.   Our mood on the way home was the exact 
opposite of what we had felt on the way to the meeting.   In Pakistan, madrasas are a kind of welfare system as they give free food and lodging, 
but their teaching does not follow a normal curriculum.   

We know what happened there.   He and his fellow activists were holding endless meetings.   Some of the students at the two madrasas 
were from Swat.   He also removed clots from my 
brain and the bullet from my shoulder blade.   Look instead to your own daughter.   I used to sit in wonder, listening 
to everything they were being taught.   

Dont! I dont want to get my clothes wet! I pleaded.   My brothers also wanted to take their pet chickens mine had died because I washed it in 
cold water on a winters day.   It broadcast every night from eight to ten and again in the 
morning from seven to nine.   I drummed my fingers.   Their first child, born in 1995, was a girl and 
stillborn.   But some of the 



family thought people would gossip about us and say we were not properly following Pashtunwali.