  He wanted to make sure no one was pressuring him 

My wife told me, You cant leave us, my father said.   I was restless and kept trying to get the monitor off my finger.   I dont remember any more.   I was sitting on the left between Moniba and a 
girl from the year below called Shazia Ramzan, holding our exam folders to our chests and our school 
bags under our feet.   

And it was hard to believe it was all over! More than a thousand ordinary people and police had 
been killed.   They were strange elections as the main 
party leaders Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto were in exile.   
Finally we got news from a cousin.   

I told the documentary makers, They cannot stop me.   We must all work together for 
the rights of girls, I said.   People in 
Buner had always resisted the Taliban but they were ordered by the local authorities not to fight.   Instead they were 
alarmed to be taken to CMH, the Combined Military Hospital.   Theyre just like our politicians they talk the talk but they wont do anything, Id 
said.   He described what was happening in Afghanistan as a war 
between two elephants the US and the Soviet Union not our war, and said that we Pashtuns were 
like the grass crushed by the hooves of two fierce beasts.   My father joked that our home had become a boarding house.   And one of my friends, Sundus, had lost her father, who had 
been killed in an explosion.   Id heard you were an infidel, he said to my father, but there 
are Qurans in your room 

Of course there are! replied my father, astonished that his faith would be questioned.   The rich people 
of Pakistan came on holiday to enjoy our clean air and scenery and our Sufi festivals of music and 
dancing.   He recognised the number as the Khushal 
School and passed the phone to his friend Ahmad Shah to answer.   And we saw the 
sights.   One day Ahmad Shah received a warning from unknown 
people that they would kill him, so for a while he left for Islamabad to try to raise awareness there of 
what was happening to our valley.   But there was no freedom of expression, and if anyone criticised the 
wali, they could be expelled from the valley.   It was around 1 1 p.   My father had felt so 
uncomfortable and scared because of the secrecy of all the arrangements, the men in uniform 
everywhere and the vulnerability of our family, that he had panicked and blown the incident out of 
proportion.   It was as if I had been 
shot, he said.   Her nephew Fazli Hakim had to carry my father on his shoulders.   The truth will abolish fear.   They had nowhere to 
sleep and no clean clothes to change into.   
Thats the closing shot in one part of the documentary.   

But she knew I had.   Our own street was on a hill so we were a bit better protected from the overflowing river, but 
we shivered at the sound of it, a growling, heavybreathing dragon devouring everything in its path.   My mother cried, but my father tried to comfort her as he felt I 
was now out of danger.   We people of Swat were first seduced by the Taliban, then killed by 
them and now blamed for them.   She had said I was salvageable 1 
had had the right surgery at the right time but my chances of recovery were now being compromised 
by the aftercare.   

We have a custom called swara by which a girl can be given to another tribe to resolve a feud.   
But lots of people called to congratulate him.   You are as vulnerable and as wanted a target as he is.   Jinnah lived there and made it our first capital, and it was soon 
flooded by millions of Muslim refugees from India known as mohajirs, which means immigrants, 
who spoke Urdu.   Look at her, he told Adam Ellick.   After that I spoke of my namesake, Malalai of Maiwand, who had 
strength and power equal to hundreds and thousands of brave men because her few lines of poetry 
changed everything so the British were defeated.   Almost two million of them were killed trying to cross the new border.   It was high for Mingora, two storeys with a big water tank on the roof.   My father always said, Malala will be free as a 
bird.   

He also felt he could never do enough to please my grandfather.   

In times of crisis we Pashtuns resort to the old trusted ways, so in 2008 elders in Swat created an 
assembly called the Qaumi Jirga to challenge Fazlullah.   Dont take any more risks! 

Finally Zahid Khan was transferred to Peshawar to be operated on and my father came home.   

Adam was astonished.   The girls will enter through that.   When 
she said she wasnt interested he turned his attention back to me.   In my grandfathers Friday addresses he would talk about the poor and the 
landowners and how true Islam is against feudalism.   He held a big meeting in Malakand, where our ancestors had fought the 
British.   All those deadlines theyd given at the beginning when they said the next 
twentyfour hours were dangerous, fortyeight were crucial, seventytwo were critical had all 



passed without incident.   

On our short trips we forgot our troubles in Swat.   
Their children are usually dirty and they are looked down upon by Pashtuns, even if they are poor 
themselves.   

In our society marriages are usually arranged by families, but theirs was a love match.   When it suits the Taliban, women can be vocal and visible.   They told him that my national and international profile meant I had 
attracted attention and death threats from the Taliban and that I needed protection.   He built a wooden ramp from which his catapults and 
arrows could reach the top of the mountain.   She was always out helping people.   

Usually there are many ways out of Mingora, but the Taliban had cut down several huge apple trees 
and used them to block some routes so everyone was squashed onto the same road.   My mothers family home, where Uncle Faiz Mohammad lived, was still standing but 
the road it stood on had vanished.   He committed every word to memory while walking in the hills, reciting it to 
the skies and birds as there was no privacy in their home.   They said there had been a big attack on a building in New York.   

In the school my father told the people, I saw your villagers burning these things.   This was 
different and very much like the holidays we read about in novels.   The letter had been buried on an inside page and the editor 
had published his name and the address of the school, which my father had not expected him to do.   

We were terribly worried about our family in Shangla, jammed between those narrow mountains.   They 
opened the doors of their homes, schools and mosques to the refugees.   Why did you wake me? Im not 
leaving my family.   

We couldnt see in front, but a young bearded man in lightcoloured clothes had stepped into the 
road and waved the van down.   

On 5 May 2009 we became IDPs.   I kept seeing the dirty face of the girl from the dump and 
continued to pester my father to give them places at our school.   Our men all have rifles, though these days they dont walk around with 
them like they do in other Pashtun areas, and my greatgrandfather used to tell stories of gun battles 
when he was a boy.   Look, Khaista, said my mother.   

Still, it was with a heavy heart that we returned to Swat.   Fazlullah denounced Pakistani government officials as 
infidels and said they were opposed to bringing in sharia law.   We read that more lives had been affected 
and more damage had been caused by the floods than the Asian tsunami, our 2005 earthquake, 
Hurricane Katrina and the Haiti earthquake combined.   But the 
Russians ended up stuck in Afghanistan for ten years, through most of the 1980s, and when he became 
a teenager my father decided he too wanted to be a jihadi.   Everyone knew these men belonged to LeT, and soon their 
black and white banners with crossed swords were flying everywhere in the mountains and valleys.   But it used to wee everywhere so that night we put it outside.   

We stayed in my mothers village, Karshat, with my uncle Faiz Mohammad and his family.   At the back of the house was a 
veranda where the women gathered.   When Sorayas family found out about the union they were furious.   Initially Madam Maryams younger sister Ayesha agreed, but her father found out and refused 
his permission saying it was too risky.   It wasnt a good way to leave things.   I thought, One day I will be a politician and do these things myself.   

It was 24 July 2009, a week after our prime minister had announced that the Taliban had been 
cleared out.   In my fathers small village eight people had been killed and 
many homes destroyed.   

The first thing I thought when I came round was, Thank God Im not dead.   I had read about 
Obama and admired him because as a young black man from a struggling family he had achieved his 
ambitions and dreams.   Miss Rubi, one of my favourite teachers, told us to stop crying and to stay 
calm; it would soon be over.   My 
father was at the Swat Press Club for a meeting of the Association of Private Schools and had just 
gone on stage to give a speech when his mobile rang.   Yet these 
innocent men were being held while the Taliban leaders went free.   We will be buried in our beds! she cried.   
All Pashtun children grow up with the story of how Malalai inspired the Afghan army to defeat the 
British in 1880 in one of the biggest battles of the Second Anglo Afghan War.   

Then it was Sufi Mohammads turn.   He had one much older brother, Saeed Ramzan who I call 
Uncle Khan dada, and five sisters.   

The next day he went on a live show on the Voice of America and angrily condemned the attacks.   

We started to receive text messages asking us to rally in the streets and show our support of the 
army.   
Everyone knew she was in love with a boy, and sometimes he would pass by and she would look at 
him from under her long dark lashes, which all the girls envied.   If you do not fall in the battle of Maiwand then, by God, someone is 
saving you as a symbol of shame.   He also thought armed guards would 
alarm the parents of the students at school, and he didnt want to put others at risk.   We dont 
know what the doctor injected her with but she went into shock and died.   They are saying they will destroy the mountain but they cant even control the road.   

Over a hundred soldiers had been killed in the military operation and 900 injured, and they wanted 
to show themselves as heroes.   Mehboob told us that his uncle had been on his way to isha prayers, the last prayers of the day, 
at the mosque on the street near his house when he was shot in the face.   

They called it Operation Silence although it was very loud.   My parents never once suggested I 
should withdraw from school, ever.   

They were still patrolling the Cheena Bazaar.   Thats also why we rarely say thank you, manana, because we believe 
a Pashtun will never forget a good deed and is bound to reciprocate at some point, just as he will a 
bad one.   It was, he says, the first thing Id done that made him smile.   With my birthday came the news 
that the Taliban had killed the owner of the Swat Continental Hotel, who was on a peace committee.   If he accidentally drew a snake he 
could erase it and the snake would disappear.   The 
Taliban were dressed in black and carried Kalashnikovs.   Was I still Malala? 

My head was aching so much that even the injections they gave me couldnt stop the pain.   In our culture women are 
expected not to mix with men they are not related to.   Pa tool 
jehan ke da khushala da, he sang.   ISI is a huge organisation with agents everywhere.   A crowd had gathered but did nothing.   Our house 
was in Gulkada, which means place of flowers, but it used to be called Butkara, or place of the 



Buddhist statues.   Baba had beautiful handwriting 
and my father would spend hours painstakingly drawing letters but Baba never once praised him.   We found that the building opposite 
the girls school had been hit by a missile but the school itself looked intact.   We had 
to borrow clothes from our relatives as we hadnt brought much.   
Then my mother would come.   Another was a girl in my class called Kausar, whose 
father embroidered clothes and shawls a trade our region is famous for.   If they did not, he said, this would expose them for what 
they really were.   

Sufi Mohammad was sitting on the stage with a long queue of people waiting to pay homage.   

Why dont you come and live with us? asked Nasir Pacha.   He had asked for my fathers advice.   Our home was always full of people 
visiting from the village.   Look, Atal, when 
Malala is prime minister, you will be her secretary, he said.   I was presented with a cheque for half a million rupees, about $4,500, for my campaign 
for girls rights.   Ziauddin, Malalas 
brain is swelling.   My brothers also wanted to take their pet chickens mine had died because I washed it in 
cold water on a winters day.   

Most Pakistanis are Sunnis like us more than eighty per cent but within that we are again many 
groups.   I was worried about losing even more marks so I made myself coffee with milk to drive 
away the devils of sleep.   Please stop it! she begged in Pashto in 
between screams and whimpers as each blow was delivered.   One 
day he called my father excitedly to say hed found the ideal place.   The Marghazar stream loops through it, milky brown from the plastic bags 
and rubbish thrown into it.   On 12 July which I remember 
because it was my birthday Fazlullah gave a radio address that was quite different to his previous 
ones.   Then he climbed up so he could catch hold of the star of 
Jupiter as a symbol of his power.   The school has another gate.   
Until then it had seemed as if the rest of Pakistan was ignoring what was happening in Swat.   We 
didnt lead a life of luxury we Pashtuns prefer to sit on floors rather than chairs.   Ten members of Monibas family were there and 
were either killed or injured.   

Lots of women were so moved by what Fazlullah said that they gave him gold and money, 
particularly in poor villages or households where the husbands were working abroad.   

My father brushed it off.   My valley, the Swat Valley, is a heavenly 
kingdom of mountains, gushing waterfalls and crystalclear lakes, welcome to paradise, it says on a 
sign as you enter the valley.   I meet my best friend 
Moniba and we sit together, talking and joking as if I had never left.   Will she survive what do you think? 

In medicine two plus two does not always make four, replied Colonel Junaid.   He would go crying to my mother and I would go to my father.   Seduced, killed and blamed.   

But my father didnt know that at the time and became very depressed.   

The other principals took paying bribes for granted, but my father argued that if all the schools 
joined together they could resist.   Spring was when Swat was at its greenest.  .   I wrinkled my nose as I approached, swatting away flies and making sure I didnt step 
on anything in my nice shoes.   That night 
when he went back to the army hostel, he took the passport from his pocket and gave it to my mother.   

When I was put in the ambulance my father was afraid the Taliban would attack again.   

Then Id pray.   My only 
ambition, he said, is to educate my children and my nation as much as I am able.   Or the day our kindergarten teacher Miss Ulfat told 
him I had written, Only Speak in Urdu, on the blackboard for my classmates at the start of an Urdu 
lesson so we would learn the language faster.   But when they went 
there to look for a building, there were banners everywhere advertising a school opening someone 
had beaten them to it.   Dont you think she is meant for the skies? Fathers 
can be very embarrassing.   

The other girls didnt agree with me.   It became known as Mullah 
FM and Fazlullah as the Radio Mullah.   He couldnt bear the thought of being killed in 
front of us.   Some people even laughed, including a local political leader sitting in the 
front row.   My mother is not 
easily scared and remained composed.   Look after your own affairs.   My father told him, Dont 
accept good things from bad people.   

We heard that thousands of people had been arrested including boys as young as eight who had 
been brainwashed to train for suicide bombing missions.   

We had moved again we would move seven times by the time I was thirteen and were living in 
an apartment building.   

One day I saw my little brother Atal digging furiously in the garden.   

Finally everyone was ready.   He was 
also the president of the All Swat Hotels Association, so he was particularly eager for life to go back 
to normal so that tourists could return.   I thought, Surely how the system works depends on the people overseeing it? The 
Taliban.   
Then a CIA agent called Raymond Davis shot and killed two men in Lahore who had approached his 
car on a motorbike.   Individual Americans also offered to help, including Senator John 
Kerry, a rich man who had visited Pakistan many times, and Gabrielle GifTords, a congresswoman 
who had been shot in the head while meeting constituents at a shopping mall in Arizona.   Islam teaches us to treat women politely, he said.   It was unusual for 
women to have a special place to meet outside the home.   If there is an entry there has to be an exit, he 
said.   

In the morning my parents came to my room as usual and woke me up.   But they were so 
captivated by the beauty of Swat they instead decided to stay there and forced the other tribes out.   The wali administered justice, kept the peace between warring tribes and collected 
ushur a tax of ten per cent of income with which he built roads, hospitals and schools.   He was a mesmerising speaker.   

In some ways the army did not seem very different to the militants.   The Americans were quick as they had thousands of troops and hundreds 
of helicopters in Afghanistan so could easily fly in supplies and show they were helping us in our 
hour of need, though some crews covered the American markings on their helicopters, fearing attack.   

Then around 3 p.   

My father was anxious to check on the school.   

It was very emotional to see him again.   
But the police did nothing to find him.   
Fazlullah retreated into the mountains.   He did not 
believe in badal revenge and would try to make people see that neither side had anything to gain 
from continuing the violence, and it would be better for them to get on with their lives.   
Its hard for girls in our society to be anything other than teachers or doctors if they can work at all.   I had moved my arms.   Many of his classes were taught under a tree 
on the bare ground.   When our bus hit a pothole on the way back my brother 
Khushal, who had been asleep, jerked awake.   
To avoid detection he used human couriers rather than phone calls or emails.   What are you 
dreaming about? 

Just about crossing oceans, Aba , I replied.   I couldnt believe it.   We needed peace whoever brought it.   

By the end of 2008, around 400 schools had been destroyed by the Taliban.   They dont have the 
power.   I remembered how frightening the earthquake had been.   

I would reply, It doesnt matter; Im also looking at them, and shed get so cross.  One year ago I left my home for school and never returned.   The director of 
the CIA said Pakistan was either involved or incompetent.   We 
heard they were dropping hundreds of commandos from helicopters into the mountains in the north.   He pushed through the 
people and ran through the camera flashes into the hospital.   He opened up our media, allowing 
new private TV channels and female newsreaders, as well as showing dancing on television.   It was as if under Zia jihad had become the 
sixth pillar of our religion on top of the five we grow up to learn the belief in one God, namaz or 
prayers five times a day, giving zakat or alms, roza fasting from dawn till sunset during the month 
of Ramadan and haj, the pilgrimage to Mecca, which every ablebodied Muslim should do once in 
their lifetime.   I was sure it was my turn next 

We pleaded with my father not to go to the hospital as it was very late and the people who had 
attacked Zahid Khan might be waiting for him.   Then the Radio Mullah turned his attention to schools.   

He began by telling us about the military operation in Swat, which he presented as a victory.   
On the way he saw smoke so high it touched the clouds, the blackest smoke hed ever seen.   He read it out.   She teases him a lot and gives him advice about 
who she thinks is a genuine friend and who is not, and my father says she is always right.   

Someone gave me a copy of The Alchemist by Paulo Coelho, a fable about a shepherd boy who 
travels to the Pyramids in search of treasure when all the time its at home.  .   



I cant take any more! 

By this time the two former friends were hardly speaking to each other and had to call in local 
elders to mediate.   But tragically she had died that January of a heart attack following an epileptic fit.   

My mother is very beautiful and my father adored her as if she were a fragile china vase, never 
laying a hand on her, unlike many of our men.  6 on the 
Richter Scale and was felt as far away as Kabul and Delhi.   But she had never 
been in a situation quite like this.   He appointed the first 
woman governor of the state bank and the first women airline pilots and coastguards.   
Vast camps of white tents sprang up mostly around Peshawar, some of which are still there today.   

The school was not far from my home and I used to walk, but since the start of last year I had been 
going with other girls in a rickshaw and coming home by bus.   When the school opened they had just three 
students.   How could something like that happen in our capital city and in a mosque? A 
mosque is a sacred place for us.   Our aunts scared us with ghost stories, like the one about Shalgwatay, 
the twenty fingered man, who they warned would sleep in our beds.   We had never seen our city like this.   His cousin laughed in astonishment.   When my father tells me stories of his childhood, he always 
says that though Baba was a difficult man he gave him the most important gift the gift of education.   The Taliban 
took over the Emerald Mountain with its mine and began selling the beautiful stones to buy their ugly 
weapons.   I have a school, but I am neither a khan nor a political leader.   Everyone complained about the drone attacks 
which were happening in the FATA almost every week.   My rivalry with MalkaeNoor continued, but after the shock of being beaten by her 
when she first joined our school, I worked hard and had managed to regain my position on the school 
honours board for first in class.   

My father suspected this would not be the end of the matter.   Roads, crops and entire villages were washed away.   Few people knew where they 
were going, they just knew they had to leave.   It was the first Taliban attack on the police in our valley.   They 
had three children, and we liked them living with us as we all played cops and robbers on the roof.   We said OK, if thats what you want, as long as we can live our lives.   Fortunately another old college friend called 
Hidayatullah stepped in and agreed to put up the money and take Naeems place.   He wanted a land of 
tolerance.   He lives with us 
and has told his wife that she must observe purdah from us and that our wives must observe purdah 
from him, all in this small space.   This caused a big problem because I was a minor so couldnt be sent alone and many people 
got involved to try and convince my father to come with me, including Colonel Junaid, Dr Javid and 
Dr Fiona.   

In some ways General Musharraf was very different from General Zia.   The school where Uncle Khan dada taught 
was in the mountain village of Sewoor, about an hour and a half s climb from their house.   The siege went on until late on 9 July, 
when the commander of the special forces outside was killed by a sniper in one of the minarets.   One of my fathers friends 
phoned her to tell her I was being taken to Peshawar by helicopter and she should come by road.   
They were thought to be behind the terrible Mumbai massacre of 2008.   

Leaving our home felt like having my heart ripped out.   Instead of Zias 
Islamisation he began what he called enlightened moderation.   The fighting was taking place 
outside Mingora though we could still hear gunfire.   I asked, Two or three months ago you told us 
Fazlullah and his deputy were shot and injured, and then you said they were in Swat and sometimes 
you say theyre in Afghanistan.   Her own nurses from 
Birmingham were there waiting and had explained to the cardiology nurses the specific procedures 
for dealing with head injuries.   He had the chance 
to be the hero of history but didnt take it, she said.   Some of our newspapers printed stories that no Jews 
went to work at the World Trade Center that day.   He also liked to talk about politics.   

We lived in Mingora, the biggest town in the valley, in fact the only city.   So our blood boiled over the Soviet invasion for both 
religious and nationalist reasons.   The only way to cross the river is by rope bridges 
or on a pulley system by which people swing themselves across in a metal box.   My father raised money from the 
Swat Association of Private Schools and the Global Peace Council to add to what we had collected 
at school.   If you eat them with milk just before bed it makes you brainy But I 
knew he didnt have much money and the almonds in the dish were a reminder of my guilt.   Maryams family was not happy 
about this as she was still nursing her baby boy, who had recently undergone a small operation.   So far we had driven in the opposite direction, but we had had to take the only lift we could 
get out of Swat.   It means we want to make decisions 
for ourselves.   Each of these strands has many different subgroups.   Sir, they are saying very bad things about our school, 
they said to my father.   We have no reliable electricity 
supply.   I told my friends at school about the rubbishdump children and that we should help.   

Maulana, you have driven me to the wall! my father said.   We timed our prayers by the shadow on the mountains.   It was an intensive care cubicle in the Queen Elizabeth Hospital.   There were pictures of me 
everywhere receiving the awards she had disapproved of.   Moving me a foreign minor to the Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital was not a simple exercise, and Bolger soon found himself tangled in the hoops of British and 
Pakistani bureaucracy.   My father was 
embarrassed and for once, short of words.   Its 
all just rubble, he said.   

I gave the note to my father and he was angry.   I was already missing the green of Swat.   When a man tried to help her she refused and said.   While boys and men could roam freely about town, my mother and I could not go 
out without a male relative to accompany us, even if it was a fiveyearold boy! This was the 
tradition.   It was the first time the army had launched an operation against its own people outside 
the FATA.   

On the last day we all had to give a speech at the Islamabad Club about our experiences in the 
valley under Taliban rule.   

I could tell my father was in a bad mood.   And on and on it goes.   As it was, Jinnah died in September 1948 just over a year later.   Their militants kidnapped 
policemen and ransacked government buildings.   Many did, and they set off, armed with old rifles or just axes and 
bazookas.   

As we drove on, the landscape changed to paddy fields of deep lush green that smelt so fresh and 
orchards of apricot and fig trees.   

My father seemed worried and shooed us into the other room, but the house was small so we could 
hear every word.   

General Kayani was adamant that the Americans should not be involved because of the ongoing 
bad relations between the two countries after the Raymond Davis episode and the bin Laden raid as 
well as the killing of some Pakistani soldiers at a border post by a US helicopter.   Before then mullahs had almost been figures of fun my father said at wedding parties 
they would just hang around in a corner and leave early but under Zia they became influential and 
were called to Islamabad for guidance on sermons.   I am told it is the height of luxury with a plush double bed, sixteen firstclass seats 
and a minihospital at the back staffed with European nurses led by a German doctor.   Then she said, Hoo she yarV or 
Attention! and we clicked our heels again.   
Two planes had flown into it.   It was thought this would then keep rival clans from fighting.   They called themselves Martyrs for 
Benazir.   It 
was risky but it was the only ambition I had back then.   I also stopped wearing jewellery because I asked myself, What are these 
baubles which tempt me? Why should I lose my character for a few metal trinkets? But I still feel 
guilty, and to this day I say sorry to God in my prayers.   People would visit to pray 
for spiritual guidance, cures for their ailments and even happy marriages for their children.   Malalai went to 
the battlefield with other women from the village to tend the wounded and take them water.   The 
government promised they would all be looked after by the state, but that felt as empty as most 
government promises.   Our house has 
holes in the walls, and every plate and cup is cracked.   One of them was the house of the local cleric, Maulana Khadim, which fell 
down crushing his four beautiful daughters.   
He also met the local army colonel, who said being in college in Abbottabad would not really be any 
safer and that as long as I kept a low profile we would be OK in Swat.   

Though I had been born in a city, I shared my fathers love of nature.   

They are scared of the pen, he replied.   The army and their 
machine guns were everywhere.   If I 
can help support one or two chil.   Dont support Talibanisation, its inhuman.  30 a.   All the girls were singing and chatting and our voices 
bounced around inside the bus.   

For him the closing of the schools also meant the loss of business.   While we had been IDPs and for all the months the school had 
been closed he had collected no fees, but the teachers still expected to be paid.   I had a thirtyyearold problem and its been resolved in one go, one man 



told my father.   They wanted my fathers help.   But once inside he 



was told, We need someone to get blood from the blood bank.   These clerics said 9/11 was 
revenge on the Americans for what they had been doing to other people round the world, but they 
ignored the fact that the people in the World Trade Center were innocent and had nothing to do with 



American policy and that the Holy Quran clearly says it is wrong to kill.   

When nightfall came, there were still tremors and my mother was in a state of panic.   At 3 p.   Then we were on the main road built by the last wali, which follows 
the wide Swat River on the left and hugs the cliffs to the right with their emerald mines.   My father did not get 
home till late that evening as he had been busy checking all the other school buildings.   By then I was used to meeting politicians.   

My father and his friends were worried and called together local elders and leaders for a peace 
conference.   I told him that we wanted 
our schools rebuilt and a girls university in Swat.   Some of us spoke out against what was happening in our valley.   My grandfather never bought him new books.   My father was told that even my brothers would not be 
spared.   But there were also text 
messages which ridiculed the army.   After the wedding my mother moved in with my grandfather and my 
uncle.   My father said you couldnt really blame people 
for leaving as the government had no power.   In it I wrote, I was getting ready for school 
one day and was about to put on my uniform when I remembered the advice of our principal, so that 
day I decided to wear my favourite pink dress.   He told people, I know there is something different about 
this child.   Some newspapers printed extracts.   But then some of my parents friends had lost a relative 
in gunfire so they went to the house to offer prayers of condolences even though nobody was really 
venturing out.   

Fazlullahs men patrolled the streets looking for offenders against his decrees just like the Taliban 
morality police we had heard about in Afghanistan.   

After that my father entered every competition in the district.   They became voluntary IDPs.   Like my father Ive always been a daydreamer, and sometimes in lessons 
my mind would drift and Id imagine that on the way home a terrorist might jump out and shoot me on 
those steps.   

Now, every morning when I open my eyes, I long to see my old room full of my things, my clothes 
all over the floor and my school prizes on the shelves.   Kainat had not realised she was hurt to start with and had gone home, 
then discovered she had been grazed by a bullet at the top of her right arm so her family had brought 
her in.   
No, Jani, he replied.   
Chinese explorers wrote stories of how there were 1,400 Buddhist monasteries along the banks of the 
River Swat, and the magical sound of temple bells would ring out across the valley.   One day he would go to the primary school first, 
another day to the girls school, the next day to the boys school.   Sometimes they would get stuck and he would 
repeat the same syllable over and over like a record caught in a groove as we all waited for the next 
syllable to suddenly pop out.   

How can we do that? I replied.   He set up the first telephone system and built the first 
primary school and ended the wesh system because the constant moving between villages meant no 
one could sell land or had any incentive to build better houses or plant fruit trees.   One of the few people who spoke out for Asia Bibi in Pakistan was the governor of Punjab, 
Salman Taseer.   It seemed to 
him that everyone must know who was inside.   

We were shocked.   Bin Laden lived on the top floor with his youngest wife, a Yemeni woman 
named Amal.   
Everyone thinks they can open a school just like that! 

The other people in the office laughed along, ridiculing him My father was angry.   I am talking to the women Then hed say, Women are meant to 
fulfil their responsibilities in the home.   But finally the 
deadline was upon us.   A woman filmmaker in Islamabad got hold of it and it 
was shown on Pakistan TV over and over, and then round the world.   This school is a centre of vulgarity and obscenity and they take girls for picnics to different 
resorts.   Our history textbooks were rewritten to describe Pakistan as a 
fortress of Islam, which made it seem as if we had existed far longer than since 1947, and 
denounced Hindus and Jews.   

On the day only eight or nine boys and girls turned up.   Faqir had a $200,000 bounty on his head yet there 
he was sitting in a government officials house having dinner.   Shiza had laughed and said he wouldnt be able to answer so many.   In my heart was the belief that God would protect 
me.   The helicopter flight was one hour and fifteen minutes.   
But all this time the mufti was watching.   He 
ordered Karachi airport to switch off its landing lights and to park fire engines on the runway to block 
the plane even though it had 200 other passengers on board and not enough fuel to get to another 
country.   It was shortly before the earthquake that Fazlullah had appeared in Imam 
Deri, a small village just a few miles outside Mingora on the other side of the Swat River, and set up 
his illegal radio station.   One of the wives was from Swat! 

The Seals had shot bin Laden in the head and his body had been flown out by helicopter.   It was simple.   Our headmistress had tried to persuade her to be a school prefect but she said she couldnt 
do anything that might distract her from her studies.   No one knew where he got the cement and iron 
bars from but the workforce was local.   



In 2002 Musharraf held elections for controlled democracy.   One day my father and I went to Peshawar to appear on a BBC Urdu talk show hosted by 
a famous columnist called Wasatullah Khan.   She is only there to prove that Isa [Jesus] was the son of Maryam, not the 
son of God! 

That may be, replied my father.   

The original idea for the documentary had been to follow my father on the last day of school, but at 
the end of the meeting Irfan asked me, What would you do if there comes a day when you cant go 
back to your valley and school? I said this wouldnt happen.   I told my best friend Moniba everything.   We passed nine resolutions 
calling for an end to child labour and asking for help to send the disabled and street children to 
school, as well as for the reconstruction of all the schools destroyed by the Taliban.   In the morning when my father was given 
cream or milk, his sisters were given tea with no milk.   

But my father had a big problem.   
She became a messenger for my parents, not only a doctor.   He was told there was a problem arranging their 
passports and that for security reasons he should not even tell the rest of my family he was going.   My fathers hand 
shook as he signed the consent papers.   Finally it landed and I was taken on board with 
my father, my cousin Khanjee, Ahmad Shah and Maryam.   

He had however neglected to tell his partner.   
Sending in the regular army was a tough decision.   Thats what he 
does.   They 
said the Americans always preferred dealing with dictators in Pakistan.   He arrested our elected prime minister, Zulfikar 
Ali Bhutto, and had him tried for treason then hanged from a scaffold in Rawalpindi jail.   But some of the 



family thought people would gossip about us and say we were not properly following Pashtunwali.   Go away! 

The mufti had failed to close our school but his interference was an indication of how our country 
was changing.   How can a 
recording respond to live questions? 

Afterwards people congratulated me.   No Pashtun leaves his land of his own sweet will, she would say.   At the end of the pass is a greendomed 
shrine where people throw coins to give thanks for their safe arrival.   So when my father announced his 
desire to ask for the hand of my mother, Tor Pekai, it was clear neither side would welcome the 
marriage.   Just the day before the barber had told a journalist that the Taliban were good Muslims.   
In a city of twenty million people is there not one person who will take this down? 

There was one important place we had to include in our visit to Karachi besides our outings to the 
sea or the huge bazaars, where my mother bought lots of clothes.   But I tried to be obedient and 
polite, always saying, Yes, sir.   Lets put out the flames of 
militancy before they reach here.   

As the day went on and the sun climbed higher in the sky, more and more of the White Mountain 
would be bathed in golden sun.   Once she was ready, the bride would start crying and we 
would stroke her hair and try to convince her not to worry.   Where once we used to blame our 
old enemy India for everything, now it was the US.   My mother had already offered her 
bangles to pay for my fathers nephew to go to college, which my father had rashly promised to fund 
fortunately, my fathers cousin Jehan Sher Khan had stepped in and she did not realise the bangles 
were only partly paid for.   In August we had our first case of cholera in Mingora and soon there was a tent of patients 
outside the hospital.   We called them chaqwartee.   Its actually the largest Pashtun city in 
the world, even though its far from our lands; between five and seven million Pashtuns have gone 



there to work.   

Almonds are good, he said.   

At school people started talking about the diary.   I was cross.   

Though I felt bad, I was also relieved it was over.   
Kill Malala and silence me for ever.   Where did you get 
that? I asked.   When someone takes away your pens you realise quite how 
important education is.   Dont 
help me, brother, as this will bring immense pleasure to Fazlullah.  m.   Then they disappeared off to Islamabad if they were elected to the National 
Assembly, or Peshawar for the Provincial Assembly, and wed hear no more of them or their 
promises.   

During Eid we went to our family village as usual.   I dont 
know why, but hearing I was being targeted did not worry me.   It was there I spent my 
twelfth birthday.   Even today 
people talk of Mr Bhutto as a man of great charisma.   We drove to Islamabads twin city of Rawalpindi to see him in his 



office.   

At night I would pray, God, give me Sanjus pencil.   We live in a place where schools are blown up.   Though she cannot read or write, my father shares everything with 
her, telling her about his day, the good and the bad.   

Adam could not come to Swat because it was too dangerous for foreigners.   The Americans said that bin Laden s deputy Ayman alZawahiri was 
hiding in Bajaur and had taken a wife there.   Ziauddin is as clean as an egg with no hair, she said.   He was an 
extremely disciplined man and could not understand why they were not the same.   It 
wasnt really a march but a cavalcade of cars.   Hed say, Mr Soandso was smoking chars but has stopped because its sinful, 
or, Mr X has kept his beard and I congratulate him, or, Mr Y voluntarily closed down his CD 
shop.   That 
changing climate made Ghulamullah bold.   My mother had had enough of the gunfire and tension and called Dr Afzal and begged him to 
persuade my father to leave.   My father returned to the village every two or three weeks to see her.   Once the 
resolutions were agreed, they were sent to officials and a handful were even acted on.   Nowhere is it written in the Quran 
that a woman should be dependent on a man.   This is our request to the world to save our schools, save our Pakistan, save our 
Swat 

When I got home, I cried and cried.   They warned people to stop listening to music, 
watching movies and dancing.   Only then did I cry.   Nearby there were boys fishing in the pile for 
metal using magnets on strings.   Two other wives and his eleven children lived below them.   

I think everyone makes a mistake at least once in their life.   Shiza Shahid, our friend from 
Islamabad, had finished her studies in Stanford and invited twentyseven girls from the Khushal 
School to spend a few days in the capital seeing the sights and taking part in workshops to help us get 
over the trauma of living under the Taliban.   A 
teenage girl wearing a black burqa and red trousers was lying face down on the ground being flogged 
in broad daylight by a bearded man in a black turban.   

When we arrived back at school after Eid, we saw a letter taped to the gate.   

My father sent food and aid to Shangla using money collected by friends and the Swat Association 
of Private Schools.   Her name Tor Pekai means raven tresses even though 
her hair is chestnut brown.   Even though he was not a khan or a 
rich man, people listened to him.   Some of the 
girls refused, saying their teachers had taught them that to become a martyr is a glorious thing.   I also 
like the name because my real name means griefstricken.   

They killed Shabana on a bitterly cold night in January 2009.   

I had decided very early I would not be like that.   But my government was reluctant to ask for fear of loss of face.   Her mother, my grandmother, had looked after all eight children 
alone after my grandfather had an accident and broke his pelvis and could not leave his bed for eight 
years.   These girls should be in purdah He told her, Take this building back from him 
and I will rent it for my madrasa.   On the walls were photographs of all our army 
chiefs, the most powerful men in our country including dictators like Musharraf and scary Zia.   He 
went outside, shouting Ziauddin, Ziauddin! The search almost cost Hidayatullah his life.   Its my duty to 
do so.   You could see them openly collecting contributions and recruiting men.   

My father was in awe of my grandfather and told me wonderful stories about him, but he also told 
me that he was a man who could not meet the high standards he set for others.   Though later he became less regular in his 
prayers, in those days he used to leave home at dawn every morning to walk to a mosque in another 
village, where he studied the Quran with a senior talib.   In the winter 
when parents didnt want their children to stay outside in the snow they would tell the story about the 
lion or tiger which must always make the first step in the snow.   
It was cramped with twenty girls and three teachers.   The women would gather 
at the house of the dead mans wife or mother and a terrible wailing would start and echo round the 
valley, which made my skin crawl.   Strangers came to the house asking 
questions about my family.   

Malalai was the daughter of a shepherd in Maiwand, a small town on the dusty plains west of 
Kandahar.   The dates of the feasts are announced by a 
special panel of clerics who watch for the appearance of the crescent moon.   We still had little 
money and my mother checked her purse to see what she had.   I dont want you to lookback and regret not taking action 

Cutting away some of my skull sounded very drastic to my father.   We took earrings, bangles and 
necklaces to decorate the bride, singing Bollywood songs as we worked.   While most of us 
cant live with our wives, he couldnt be without his.   Only the radio was allowed, and all music except for 
Taliban songs was declared haram.   Malala is not just the daughter of Ziauddin, they would say; she is the daughter of all of 
us.   

Growing up, we children spent most of our time with our mother.   When he became army 
chief the first thing General Kayani did was improve housing, food rations and education for ordinary 
soldiers rather than officers.   

Finally the goahead was given and the doctors had to face the problem of how I was to be moved 



and who would pay for it.   But we werent exactly cooperating as the ISI was still 
arming Taliban fighters and giving their leaders sanctuary in Quetta.   There was 
no response from Muslim Khan because his phone interview had been prerecorded.   You saved this womans husband but not your own house! he said.   She still has lots to do.   

My father consoled me by telling me about the mistakes great heroes made when they were 
children.   He 
quickly agreed it was the right thing to do, although afterwards he said, None of us ever imagined 
how much it would take over the hospital.   

There was little to do in my fathers village.   During my fathers first term at 
college national elections were held, which were won by Benazir Bhutto, daughter of the prime 
minister who had been executed when my father was a boy.   Even as 
a toddler you talked like a politician, he teased.   Not only did our army and ISI have long links with 
some of the militants, but it also meant our troops would be fighting their own Pashtun brothers.   As in much of our country, there were concrete 
blocks and checkpoints all around CMH to protect it from suicide bombers.   What are you 
doing in there PishoT my mother would shout.   Instead they used the buildings for their 
hujras or even to keep their animals.   Only twice had I not come top both 
times when I was beaten by my class rival Malka eNoor.   Khalida had 
been sold into marriage to an old man who used to beat her, and eventually she ran away with her 
three daughters.   
My favourite programme was Shaka Laka Boom Boom, an Indian childrens series about a boy called 
Sanju who has a magic pencil.   Moniba sets down rules which I try to follow.   We said it was the worst lunch ever.   

My father also loved to write poetry, sometimes about love, but often on controversial themes such 
as honour killings and womens rights.   They even took control of 
the famous shrine of a Sufi saint, Pir Baba, which was a pilgrimage site.   One of his friends had persuaded him to participate in a 
documentary for the New York Times website to show the world what was happening to us.  / Either he leaves from 
poverty or he leaves for love.   We liked performing plays.   When he was a child he thought this small valley 
was the entire world and that if anyone went beyond the point where either mountain kissed the sky, 
they would fall off.   I knew my mother was still mourning my aunt and they had been feeling uneasy 
about me receiving so many awards, but it seemed to be about more than that.   If we had not put guns in the hands of madrasa students at the behest of foreign powers 
we would not be facing this bloodbath in the tribal areas and Swat, he said.   
Her father said nothing.   

My friends and I couldnt understand why it was so wrong.   

There was less foreign help than there might have been at another time.   

The guard explained that the tomb in the main room under a giant chandelier from China did not 
contain Jinnahs body.   Our founder Jinnah wanted the rights of 
Muslims in India to be recognised, but the majority of people in India were Hindu.   

Women in the village hid their faces whenever they left their purdah quarters and could not meet or 
speak to men who were not their close relatives.   
The British government had offered assistance but needed a formal request from the Pakistan 
government.   It was time to get back to my 
books.   Moniba had the most beautiful 
writing and presentation of the three of us, but I always told her she did not trust herself enough.   It was a 
time of horror and fear.   

I liked doing my hair in different styles and would spend ages in the bathroom in front of the mirror 
trying out looks I had seen in movies.   I went and 
looked at my uniform, happy that I would soon be able to wear it openly.   In the same way, if 
you choose a good method to do something bad its still bad.   Attiya 
used to tease me by saying, Taliban is good, army not good.   When she heard that I had been 
hurt she was having her reading lesson with Miss Ulfat and struggling to learn words like book and 
apple.   He has 
come to see you.   The Sangota girls were also very bright, which meant more 
competition.   

Afterwards, we found out that despite his youthful appearance he had been a neurosurgeon for 
thirteen years and was the most experienced and decorated neurosurgeon in the Pakistani army.   
Three children is a small family by Swati standards, where most people have seven or eight.   

The Taliban destroyed the Buddhist statues and stupas where we played, which had been there for 
thousands of years and were a part of our history from the time of the Kushan kings.   This was the fear 
that filled our daily lives.   I was also known for 
participating in everything badminton, drama, cricket, art, even singing, though I wasnt much good.   One of the few he 



took was from the parents of Arfa Karim, a child computer genius from Punjab with whom I had 
spoken during forums.   He died of tuberculosis just a year after the creation of Pakistan and we havent 
stopped fighting since.   But when you banned girls 
education people spoke out.   My father, Ziauddin, is different 
from most Pashtun men.   I 
took a photo of her and vowed I would do everything in my power to help educate girls just like her.   Even in summer its frosted with snow.   Some people are afraid of ghosts, some of spiders or snakes in 
those days we were afraid of our fellow human beings.   Nawaz Sharif was prime minister at 
the time and had fallen out with his army chief General Pervez Musharraf and sacked him.   Are you Malalas father? Once again my fathers heart sank.   There were also giant posters pasted on the front of the mosque with the 
same accusations.   Yes, OK.   

Dr Javid had known this was coming.   I was speaking to them but no one could hear me because of 
the tube in my neck.   Fingers were even pointed at my father.   

Malala was a lucky girl, says Hidayatullah.   



17 

Praying to Be Tall 



When i was thirteen I stopped growing.   Its ridiculous, my father would say, that this socalled 
scholar is spreading ignorance.   Then Maryam would say, 
Malala, Malala.   Dont do that, 
Maryam said.   She would sit with them patiently and 
would then ask my father to explain every detail to my mother.   

Once the shaking had stopped we were all sent home.   When the TV news began to show the devastation 
we saw that entire villages had been turned to dust.   Its very hard on them.   She 
was relieved to see us and hugged us, tears streaming down her face.   One hot day she had fetched water for her fellow workers but some of 
them refused to drink it, saying that the water was unclean because she was a Christian.   I was not nervous though my father tried to 
intimidate me by saying Prime Minister Gilani came from a family of saints.   A famous poem was written at that time by Rahmat Shah Sayel, the same Peshawar poet who 
wrote the poem about my namesake.   There was outrage round the world and all the talk shows covered 
the case.   

The next morning the news was good.   

Moniba and I liked to sit near the open back so we could see out.   All that 
remained of the chickens was a pile of feathers and the bones of their small bodies entangled as if 
they had died in an embrace.   You must go.   Benazirs bus was blown up in a 
wave of orange flame.   I agree that female teachers should educate girls, he said.   You 
speak English? he asked me.   He also helped Baba with 
heavy tasks like clearing snow from the roof.   

We came home from school late that day.   Musharraf then 
seized power and threw Sharif into a dungeon in Attack Fort.   People asked how we could be spending $6 billion a year on the 
military (seven times more than we were spending on education), if four American helicopters could 
just sneak in under our radar? And if they could do it, what was to stop the Indians next door? Please 
dont honk, the army is sleeping, said one text, and Secondhand Pakistani radar for sale .   

My father told the clerk to call him next time he saw the maulana.   Some thought my father had done it for 
me but Madam Maryam, our principal, told them, No.   

It was thrilling to see my words on the website.   We dont understand why hes been 
attacked when they claim theres peace, he said.   She had been married off as soon as 
she entered puberty.   She begged him to give some cooked rice to the poor, as we believe that if you give 
rice, even ants and birds will eat the bits that drop to the floor and will pray for us.   
Sometimes there was a boy called Haroon with them, who was a year older than me and used to live 
on our street.   As I threw the rubbish on the mountain of rotting food, I saw something 
move and I jumped.   I kept thinking of my school bag at home 
with copies of Oliver Twist and Romeo and Juliet waiting to be read and the Ugly Betty DVDs on the 
shelf.   Some of the girls also took part, but not in public.   Now you just need to catch 
Fazlullah.   There was a beautiful fifteenyearold girl called Seema.   

I wore pink to the gala and for the first time talked publicly about how we had defied the Taliban 
edict and carried on going to school secretly.   

Around the same time as our Taliban were emerging in Swat, the girls of the Red Mosque madrasa 
began terrorising the streets of Islamabad.   But eventually Baba gave him a fine speech, which my father 
practised and practised.   The leader of LeT is a fiery professor 
from Lahore called Hafiz Saeed, who is often on television calling on people to attack India.   People used to say both Zahid Khan and my father were on the 
Taliban radar and both would be killed; the only thing they didnt know was which would be killed 
first.   My father had 
turned his weakness into strength.   Instead we spoke 
into a microphone in our classrooms and our voices were then projected into the main hall.   They set up volunteer traffic police called Falcon 
Commandos, who drove through the streets with machine guns mounted on top of their pickup trucks.   

People warned my father to leave the hospital.   

It wasnt the first time.   They had no phone and no access to a 
computer to check on my progress.   He didnt want to go alone 
with the officials and insisted my mother come too.   In my country too many politicians think nothing 
of stealing.   His skin looked paperthin.   

A Funny Kind of Peace 

When my brothers schools reopened after the winter break, Khushal said he would rather stay at 
home like me.   Today Swat is part of the province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, or 
KPK, as many Pakistanis call it, but Swat used to be separate from the rest of Pakistan.   
My mother and brothers had no passports or documentation.   Baitullah denied responsibility, which was unusual for the Taliban.   He followed me to the house and put a note inside our gate where I would see it.   They were 
just waiting to be married, says my father.   Can you sell them to me for ten 
rupees? she asked.   So he called my cousin to take him.   I was one of the three shortest girls in my class of thirty.   But also give him quiet time to ponder the eternal 
mystery of birds in the sky, bees in the sun, and the flowers on a green hillside, it says.   How was it possible that we were now garlanding murderers? 

Shortly after that my father got another death threat.   CMH is a large sprawling brick 
hospital with 600 beds and dates from British rule.   

Unfortunately not many people were convinced.   

This wasnt just happening in Swat.   

Would it have been better if we had not become independent but stayed part of India? I asked my 
father.   Hidayatullah was one of the first to call.   We should focus on practical 
issues.   

He laughed a lot, but as a boy he had been so selfconscious about being darkskinned that he went 
to the fields to get buffalo milk to spread on his face, thinking it would make him lighter.   

The pressure from the whole country worked, and Fazlullah agreed to lift the ban for girls up to ten 
years old Year 4.   Millions of Afghans fled across the border and General Zia gave them refuge.   He used his 
station to encourage people to adopt good habits and abandon practices he said were bad.   Others said he had been ordered to deliver this speech and been warned, If you dont, 
there are four or five suicide bombers who will blast you and everyone there.   The man told him the shopkeeper had 
given him a photocopied letter.   Down on the river at the Karshat end were 
water buffaloes.   

Naeem and my father invested their entire savings of 60,000 rupees.   My brother 
Khushal was now at school in Abbottabad, so it was just me, my parents and Atal.   It wasnt the best of days to start 
with as it was the middle of school exams, though as a bookish girl I didnt mind them as much as 
some of my classmates.   He is lying.   He even 
sanctioned an annual pop concert on the eve of Independence Day, which was broadcast to the nation.   My father would make him good tea and offer him biscuits in the hope that would 
keep him satisfied.   But it wasnt easy to study as there was no electricity in the village in those days.   

Oof, I was so happy, by God, says my father.   We 
have fields of wild flowers, orchards of delicious fruit, emerald mines and rivers full of trout.   He made Afghanistan a rallying point not only for the West, which wanted to stop the 
spread of communism from the Soviet Union, but also for Muslims from Sudan to Tajikistan, who saw 
it as a fellow Islamic country under attack from infidels.   There were live 
electric cables hanging loose and swaying in the wind.   When her father called, my father cried.   



O Ziauddin! What have they done? Madam Maryam burst through the doors.   

Having so many people around made it hard to study.   A group of boys from our neighbourhood used to hang round there.   She knew he couldnt let her go 
alone.   We ran up the steps anticipating the worst.   We Pashtuns see this as an auspicious sign.   They 
are very conservative and most of our madrasas are Deobandi.   He was the nephew of my fathers friend Zahid Khan, the hotel 
owner who had been attacked in 2009.   She smells the threat, my mother told 
my father.   He was also an imam at the local mosque.   My own grandfather 
narrowly escaped death in the riots when his train was attacked by Hindus on his way home from 
Delhi, where he had been studying.   What we need to know is who imposed these militants on us, he wrote.   Chop, chop, chop.   Of course this only applied to the men; women in 
our area dont vote.   My father was 
teacher, accountant and principal.   One of the school clerks told my father that the mufti kept 
coming into school and demanding why we girls were still using the main entrance.   One day my father ran into his bank manager.   In the 1950s he ended the system where 
people paid taxes to the khans.   Shabanas father said a 
group of men had knocked at her door and asked her to dance for them She went to put on her dancing 
clothes, and when she returned to dance for them, they pulled out their guns and threatened to slit her 
throat.   My 
father didnt have any money for the hospital or for a midwife so a neighbour helped at my birth.   Please take care of my daughter.   The Americans were worried the deal meant surrender.   Our friends couldnt believe it.   Hello, 
BhabiV I called.   In the ones from the early days of Pakistan you 
could easily see from his thin sunken face that Jinnah was dying.   One day, as Sher Zaman and two of his brothers were on their way to the land, 
they were ambushed by his uncle and some of his men.   The Taliban set up shariat courts in all districts and 
broadcast sermons from mosques calling on the local youth to join them 

Just as they had in Swat, they burned TV sets, pictures, DVDs and tapes.   We visited the Lok Virsa 
museum, and it was a joy to celebrate our national heritage once again.   Soon everyone was 
weeping.   Within an hour of the announcement on television of Musharraf s sacking, tanks were on the 
streets and troops had taken over the newsrooms and the airports.   My father heard that many of the boys were taken in by the JuD and housed in 
their madrasas.   From there they were running 
training camps and launching raids across the border on NATO troops.   She even helped whitewash the school walls, holding up the lanterns so they could paint 
when the light went off in power cuts.   I thought back to the 
children working on the rubbish heap.   When she was a teenager, both her father and the man she was supposed to marry were 
among thousands of Afghans fighting against the British occupation of their country.   

My mother gave them tea and food but that wasnt why they came.   When my father asked why, he explained it was his villages turn to work on 
Fazlullahs buildings.   Neither 
man could get any money from their families, and Hidayatullah was not pleased to discover that my 
father was still in debt to lots of people from college, so they were always receiving letters 
demanding money.   

There was a teacher in our school who lived just a tenminute walk from our house.   On each side of the family he had an uncle with the same affliction.   
We sat stunned.   I prayed to God every night to give me strength.   But President Bush kept praising Musharraf, 
inviting him to Washington and calling him his buddy.   There was even a case of a man drawing a teachers pension 
when he had never taught a day in his life.   Almost two 
million of us were fleeing Swat and you couldnt have fitted two million people in those camps.   On the way we passed 
through Aashiqan eRasool square and were shocked to see a picture of the murderer of Governor 
Salman Taseer decorated with garlands of rose petals as though he were a saint.   They are sitting in their bunkers on top of the hills.   
Danger began to creep closer.   It could 
have been you.   His sisters my aunts did not go to school at all, just like 
millions of girls in my country.   Finally my father was 
called forward.   Many of those killed 
were children who like me had been at school that morning.   I also knew from watching my own mother that Pashtun 
women are very powerful and strong.   Then vice versa.   When I was little I went to the bazaar with my mother and spotted a pile of 
almonds on a cart.   The birds 
loved that tree.   But by the middle of 2007 the situation was so bad that people 



began to worry the militants could take over the capital.   As far as he could see, I was medically dead.   

I had the run of the school as my playground.   

The Bloody Square 

The bodies would be dumped in the square at night so that everyone would see them the next 
morning on their way to work.   Sir, the school you 
are running is Western and infidel, it said.   But a few months later he 
was cleared.   
You can stay there accepting everything from the Taliban or you can make a stand against them 

My father told us what Hidayatullah had said.   

At twelve oclock Baba called us over the loudspeaker.   She looked like I imagined Shashaka, the dirty woman they told us about in tales in the village 
to make us wash.   He is just fooling people.   If you want to 
resolve a dispute or come out from conflict, the very first thing is to speak the truth.   The army had stayed in Swat and 
were everywhere in the town, yet Fazlullah still broadcast every day on the radio and throughout 
2008 the situation was even worse than before with bomb blasts and killings.   I was reminded 
of our history lessons, in which we learned about the loot or bounty an army enjoys when a battle is 
won.   Money poured in from all over the Arab 
world, particularly Saudi Arabia, which matched whatever the US sent, and volunteer fighters too, 
including a Saudi millionaire called Osama bin Laden.   There was no way they 
could pay this so my father asked one of his political friends to use his influence.   For some reason my 
fathers keys would not work so we found a boy who climbed over the wall and opened it from the 
inside.   They told us, Sisters, you are bringing 

shame.   We dont have secrets from each other 
and we dont share our secrets with anyone else.   It was built in 1965 and got its name from its red walls.   When we were IDPs I had thought about becoming a 
politician and now I knew that was the right choice.   They provided free 
textbooks and grants to students but held deeply intolerant views and their favourite pastime was to 
patrol universities and sabotage music concerts.   Foreigners call them 
suicide bridges but we loved them.   We enjoyed peace festivals with music and dancing, unheard of under the 
Taliban.   Inside I was lying on a trolley, a bandage 
over my head, my eyes closed, my hair spread out.   That was tough and dangerous work, and the coffins of 
those killed in accidents would come back several times a year.   
His phone kept ringing.   I wanted to go to Shangla with my father and the trucks but 
he told me it would be too dangerous.   The troops 
blasted holes in the wall surrounding the mosque and fired mortars at the compound as helicopter 
gunships hovered overhead.   Dont worry I told her.   The villagers were helpless.   The previous tenants had also run a school the Ramada School.   Later the curfew took over our lives.   I had no idea what New York and America were.   

Afterwards we went into the small museum at the back, which had displays of the special white 
bow ties Jinnah used to order from Paris, his threepiece suits tailored in London, his golf clubs and a 
special travelling box with drawers for twelve pairs of shoes including his favourite twotone 
brogues.   In our culture doctors dont explain 
things to patients or relatives, and my father asked humbly, If you dont mind, I have a stupid 
question.   Besides he had seven other children to think about.   I 
had chosen Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Benazir Bhutto and President Barack Obama.   Look instead to your own daughter.   .   Luckily, Benazir survived because 
she had gone downstairs to an armoured compartment to rest her feet just before the explosions, but 
150 people had been killed.   But I was more concerned with matters closer to home our own street to 
be exact.   His name was Musa Khan Khel, and he had 
often interviewed my father.   Tuition at Jehanzeb was free but my father needed money 
to live on.   My father was desperate not to give up the school so agreed to pay Naeem a return 
on his share of the investment.   But a smaller 
group believed that leadership should have stayed within the Prophets family and that Ali, his sonin 
law and cousin, should have taken over.   Quickly, it became a rubbish mountain.   This verse was recited by the prophet 
Yunus when he was in the tummy of the whale.   
They told my father that the police had turned up at the house and demanded to know whether we had 
received any threats.   Hospitality is an important part of Pashtun culture.   They cleaned and bandaged the wound.   

Things often seemed to happen around my birthday, and around the time I turned thirteen in July 
2010 the rain came.   My father was in favour of this.   But then I felt guilty as I knew we were lucky.   He also swept the floors, whitewashed the walls and cleaned the 
bathrooms.   One of 
the most vocal people against me was a female MP called Dr Raheela Qazi from the religious 
JamaateIslami party.   There was a lot of construction going on to build a 
new tower block.   I 
was happy when the exam was over, chatting and gossiping with my friends as we waited for Sher 
Mohammad Baba, a school assistant, to call for us when the bus arrived.   When we entered the shop we 
were going to, the shopkeeper laughed and told us he got scared thinking we night be suicide 
bombers as many suicide bombers wore the burqa.   I 
was different I never hid my desire when I changed from wanting to be a doctor to wanting to be an 
inventor or a politician.   All three brothers were killed.   My mother tried very hard to 
persuade him to come with us but he refused.   

I told you last night the issue was resolved, my father replied.   

It started to feel as though the school was not meant to be, but my father would not give up on his 
dream so easily.   Then he did a 
tracheotomy as he was worried the swelling was blocking my airway.   

To start with the only rescue workers who came were a few from a locally based foreign aid 
agency and volunteers from the TehrikeNifazeShariaeMohammadi (TNSM) or Movement for the 
Enforcement of Islamic Law, the group founded by Sufi Mohammad that had sent men to fight in 
Afghanistan.   When 
the highest authority in your district joins the Taliban, then Talibanisation becomes normal.   People often said the Taliban might kill my father but not me.   There we met up 
with my cousin Khanjee, who was heading north like us.   I shouted at him so 
angrily that he stopped.   
Sometimes Fazlullah appeared galloping in on a black horse.   He was twentyeight years old.   I could 
listen endlessly to the story of how they met.   Tables were 
set up for the women to hand over their wedding bangles and necklaces and women queued up to do 
so or sent their sons.   Even those who had 
defended Fazlullah at the start, believing his men were the real standardbearers of Islam, and given 
him their gold, began to turn against him My father told me about a woman who had donated 
generously to the Taliban while her husband was working abroad.   They had no interest in developing Swat.   She was also our only political 
leader to speak out against the militants and even offered to help American troops hunt for bin Laden 
inside Pakistani borders.   The 
meeting started with recitations from the Chapter of Victory a surah from the Quran followed by 
speeches from different leaders in the five districts of our valley Kohistan, Malakand, Shangla, 
Upper Dir and Lower Dir.   It made me think 
of old war movies or the video games my brother Khushal loves to play.   My father remembers that one 
day a maulana called Sufi Mohammad came to the village and asked young men to join him to fight 
the Russians in the name of Islam.   The journey was just two hours, 
which I found incredible.   
Sometimes I could hardly see over the lectern.   Be natural, Irfan told me.   He and Hidayatullah hardly had money to pay for food, let 
alone bribes.   The gunfire was in celebration.   

The other girls were screaming and crying.   I entrust her to you 



As soon as Usman Bhai Jan realised what had happened he drove the dyna to Swat Central Hospital 
at top speed.   He read the great poems of Saadi, Allama Iqbal and Rumi to my father with such 
passion and fire it was as if he was teaching the whole mosque.   Most of the army leadership learned 
about it on TV.   We should learn everything and then choose which path to 
follow.   I was overwhelmed.   

Dr Javid, who was there when I was brought round, says he will never forget the look of fear and 
bewilderment on my face.   They 
were keeping the cars in lines but with weapons not whistles.   My father told him he had just finished school and had won a 
college place at Jehanzeb.   

It was about 5.   The Americans 
said he had been tipped off and escaped.   
For many in the remote areas it was the first time they had seen a foreigner.   People 
reassured my mother that although I had been shot in the head, the bullet had just skimmed my 
forehead.   

My father was bewildered by all the people gathered outside politicians, government dignitaries, 
provincial ministers who had come to show their sympathy.   How dare the Taliban take away my basic right to education? I said.   It was strange to think it was just a port of 300,000 
people when Pakistan was created.   Then all that night we heard dar dar dar, the boom of cannons and machine guns 
from the hills.   Look, Ziauddin, he said.   

Dr Javid asked to see my father privately.   Khalid Sheikh Mohammad, the mastermind of 9/ 1 1 , was found in a house just a mile 
from the army chief s official residence in Rawalpindi.   

Dear Muslim brothers 

There is a school, the Khushal School, which is run by an NGO [NGOs have a very bad reputation among religious people in our 



country so this was a way to invite peoples wrath] and is a centre of vulgarity and obscenity.   Many of the rich fled.   By contrast we Pashtuns 
are very divided, some following Imran Khan because he is Pashtun, a khan and a great cricketer, 
some Maulana Fazlur Rehman because his party JUI is Islamic, some the secular ANP because its a 
Pashtun nationalist party and some the PPP of Benazir Bhutto or the PML(N) of Nawaz Sharif.   

I would listen rapt as he told stories of warring tribes, Pashtun leaders and saints, often through 
poems that he read in a melodious voice, crying sometimes as he read.   

Late on Wednesday night two military doctors who were intensive care specialists had arrived by 
road from Islamabad.   They liked it very much and told us they 
had a guesthouse in Abbottabad where we could all go.   He became determined to end the traditional rivalry between him and his cousins.   He used his wifes phone to protect us as he said his own phone 
was bugged by the intelligence services.   It took them a week to clear the debris.   What more would it take for the army and government to resist them? 

In Washington the government of President Obama had just announced it was sending 21,000 more 
troops to Afghanistan to turn round the war against the Taliban.   One said he had been ordered by Mullah Fazlullah 
to help build his centre in Imam Deri.   In our case it 
happened to be a whitebearded militant called Sufi Mohammad.   

We always went to the village for the Eid holidays.   

It was while he was visiting one afternoon in September 2001 that there was a great commotion 
and other people started arriving.   The Pakistani newspaper 
Dawn wrote in an editorial that the deal sent a disastrous signal fight the state militarily and it will 
give you what you want and get nothing in return .   There were 
offers too from Germany, Singapore, the UAE and Britain.   On the night of 7 October 2008 we heard a series of faraway blasts.   My father was known 
in the family as Khaista dada, which means beautiful.   But they 
are from different tribes so their love causes a war.   He 
had joined the military as a doctor because of their superior facilities, following in the footsteps of 
his uncle, who was also an army neurosurgeon.   

That evening my father received a call from the family who had been sharing our home for the last 
eighteen months.   As we headed south the 
land became more parched.   At first he 
thought it might be a brick factory, but as he approached he saw bearded figures in turbans burning 
TVs and computers.   I didnt want to stop learning.   My brothers and I thought of digging a tunnel.   

We drove out of the bazaar, past the grinning red mouth signs for dentists, the carts stacked with 
wooden cages crammed with beadyeyed white chickens with scarlet beaks, and jewellery stores 
with windows full of gold wedding bangles.   People thought that he was a good interpreter of the Holy Quran and admired his 
charisma.   He promised to meet us later in Shangla.   Am I in an office or am I in a 
police station or a court? Am I a criminal? He decided to challenge the officials to protect other 
school owners from such bullying and corruption.   Why are you asking all these questions? he demanded.   It seemed like the Taliban didnt want us to do 
anything.   So at first we thought we were in danger.   Instead he just called himself 
Ziauddin Yousafzai, our clan name.   On top 
of some of the peaks were ruins where vultures circled, the remains of forts built by the first wali.   Sometimes I was very 
afraid but I said nothing, and it didnt mean I would stop going to school.   In Pakistan we had had a woman prime minister and in Islamabad I had met those impressive 
working women, yet the fact was that we were a country where almost all the women depend entirely 
on men.   The school was 
my world and my world was the school.   There were 
two families in our village he could not convince.   The 
army seemed much more effective at PR than our politicians.   

Shiza wanted to introduce us to influential people.   At night I used to pray a lot.   But now I had two other girls in the 
room I want space! Id cry.   Their previous home had a mud roof which leaked in the rain and we had two spare 
rooms so they stayed with us for a nominal rent and their children went to our school for free.   

My mother was so upset when we told her that she went to bed in tears.   For us a turban is a public 
symbol of chivalry and Pashtunness, and for a man to lose his turban is considered a great humili 
ation.   Whats wrong with you people? he asked Irfan and my father.   But Fazlullahs headquarters were just a few miles away, and 
even though the Taliban were not near our house they were in the markets, in the streets and the hills.   

Swat was one of the places most affected.   He was said to be more moderate than his soninlaw Fazlullah, and there was hope that he 
would make a peace deal with the government to impose sharia law in Swat and release us from 
Taliban violence.   His 
sermons at Friday prayers were so popular that people would come down from the mountains by 
donkey or on foot to hear him.   Its just I so wanted a new book, 
unmarked by another student and bought with my father s money.   

The threats began to come closer to home.   Dont worry, we 
will sort everything out, he said.   Electric pylons had been smashed into pieces so we had no 
power.   

Occasionally there would be real weddings with big feasts which went on for days and left the 
family bankrupt or in debt.   What if they make a mess in the car? she asked.   

But they did not drive the Taliban away.   Maybe they had even shot at people through that hole.   Look, she is responding! she said.   Dont open it, 
Malala! my father ordered.   Then we have the Deobandi, named after 
another famous nineteenth century madrasa in Uttar Pradesh, this time in the village of Deoband.   Then we would put makeup 
on her face that wed taken from our mothers, dip her hands in hot limestone and soda to make them 
white, and paint her nails red with henna.   It was clear the 
superintendent wanted money.   He was right.   After that they moved to another 
street and we moved into their house.   We knew many victims of feuds.   At that moment I was very happy.   Ms, ps and ks 
were all enemies lying in wait.   She disapproves of dancing because she says God would not like it, but she loves to decorate 
herself with pretty things, embroidered clothes and golden necklaces and bangles.   
There was no other college in Shangla, and if he didnt go to college, he would never be able to move 



out of the village and realise his dream.   I 
think it was then that Adam decided he should focus on me.   The rest of Swat is OK.   I read books and I had a 
different accent and used slang expressions from Mingora.   My cousin quickly gave us his music cassettes to hide in our purses.   There was the one about people of all 
religions being free to worship in the new Pakistan.   Moniba and I 
had not spoken since our fight on the last day before becoming IDPs.   I remembered the tapa my 
grandmother used to recite: No Pashtun leaves his land of his own sweet will.   Instead I am in a country which is five hours 
behind my beloved homeland Pakistan and my home in the Swat Valley.   

The school continued to lose money.   

The authorities turned a blind eye.   

My father called my cousin Khanjee to find out how widely the letters had been distributed.   But the girls of Swat are not afraid of anyone.   You are the ones educating their children 

He soon became president of the organisation and expanded it until it included 400 principals.   He was recognised by the British as the head of state in 1926 and 
installed as wali, which is our word for ruler.   Your school bus has been fired 
on, he whispered urgently to my father.   

I was speaking at a lot of events but because I was so short it wasnt easy to be authoritative.   He laughed at the idea.   

These were strangelooking men with long straggly hair and beards and camouflage vests over their 
shalwar kamiz, which they wore with the trousers well above the ankle.   I cannot leave the area.   Our mood on the way home was the exact 
opposite of what we had felt on the way to the meeting.   

Shortly afterwards the mufti went to the woman who owned the school premises and said, 
Ziauddin is running a haram school in your building and bringing shame on the mohalla 
[neighbourhood].   

A nurse gave me a pencil and a pad.   So can he.   

My father was glad he didnt hear what she had told Dr Javid.   
There were balloons and I had made the same wish I was making on my twelfth birthday, but this time 
there was no cake and there were no candles to blow out.   The shop would then 
sell it on at a profit.   Blackskinned people 
are often called white and short people tall.   Thats what all the tubes and machines were 
monitoring.   Atal would not stop 
weeping.   We 
havent done anything wrong.   There were 
children in the laps of adults and smaller children in their laps.   

In Mardan there were already big camps of white UNHCR tents like those for Afghan refugees in 
Peshawar.   Mingora was expanding quickly around 175,000 
people now called it home and our oncefresh air was becoming very polluted from all the vehicles 
and cooking fires.   My brave daughter, my beautiful daughter, she cried.   I have had such dreams since the launch 
of the military operation in Swat.   After about ten 
minutes of this he realised from my facial expressions that I could understand him perfectly.   I completed the paper but I knew Id made a mistake filling in the blanks.   My father didnt 
know what to do.   

Driving from the airport to the hostel, I was amazed by the number of people and houses and cars.   
So he put me and my brothers Khushal and Atal, then just a baby, to bed.   Nor would 



he leave Swat.   I thought Swat would be free of the Taliban one day and we would rejoice, but 
now I realised that might not happen.   His body was found dumped in his familys ancestral graveyard.   But 

We lived in the most beautiful place in all the world.   People later said that some of this money had been diverted to finance a plot 
to bomb planes travelling from Britain to the US.   She rushed home and told my grandmother, who was staying with us at the time.   By Thursday morning my father was so convinced that I would 
die that he told my uncle Faiz Mohammad that the village should start preparing for my funeral.   He was relieved but baffled.   The peace deal was merely 
a mirage.   My father was out a lot as he was 
busy, not just with his school, but also with literary societies and jirgas, as well as trying to save the 
environment, trying to save our valley.   I thought my school would not close and it had.   But there was no clean water and people started dying from cholera.   Most of the 
time they hid their faces.   

Wherever we lived my mother filled our house with people.   Look at what these 
criminals are doing to pollute our beautiful valley, he always said.   But they had 
come a long way and its hard for us as Pashtuns to refuse hospitality.   

One night we all went for dinner at the house of my fathers friend Dr Afzal, who runs a hospital.   Every morning I would stand against it to check 
if I had grown.   

I asked Usman Bhai Jan to tell us a joke while we were waiting for two teachers to arrive.   He said they 
had told him, Either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists, and threatened to bomb us back 
to the Stone Age if we stood against them.   Those from my class were me, Moniba, MalkaeNoor, 
Rida, Karishma and Sundus, and we were chaperoned by my mother and Madam Maryam 

We left for the capital on Independence Day, 14 August, and travelled by bus, everyone brimming 
with excitement.   I cant leave my wife and sons alone here.   If you are unable to do that then you should tell others 
about it, and if you cant do that you should think about how bad it is in your heart.   I will kill him.   He loved that painting and had hung it over his bed.   I think of her as my big sister even though I am six months 
older than her.   People were desperately worried that the Taliban would 
take advantage of the chaos and return to the valley.   Was she not a 
woman and a good woman at that? 

No, said the mullah.   But I had never done anything like this.   More than three years had passed since the 
military operation to drive the Taliban out of Swat had begun.   We learned that the first wife of the Prophet was a 
businesswoman called Khadijah.   Here there is any convenience you can imagine.   But he said not to go would be cowardly.   He was a great hero of my father for his fight against apartheid.   

Our army had never before gone into the FATA.   How 
can you? Rohul Amin asked, laughing.   The 
militants fled to the forests and by early December the army said they had cleared most areas.   Instead the only people knocking on our doors are beggars! This is a Herculean task, he added.   My mother began to pray.   We ran outside and they 
threw toffees and tennis balls down to us, which we rushed to catch.   He was from a wealthy khan family and the local 
vice president of the ANP.   I am inspired by Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the man who some call the Frontier Gandhi, 
who introduced a non violent philosophy to our culture.   We all call her Bhabi now.   Sometimes we covered our ears or buried our heads under 
pillows, but the guns were close by and the noise was too loud to block out.   The 
nations prayers are with you and your daughter, he told my father.   Why hasnt he been caught? 
Afterwards people told him to be very careful.   Although we had a computer, 
there were frequent power cuts and few places had Internet access.   Then 
his nephew Aziz, who had come to help, raised the Pakistan flag.   The highest mountain of all is the 
pyramid shaped Mount Elum To us its a sacred mountain and so high that it always wears a 
necklace of fleecy clouds.   Though he and my father were great rivals, they admired each other and later became 
friends.   I ate a little bit of it then gave it to another girl to finish.   They thought it was toxic, especially at 
times like this.   The other girls 
all covered their faces before emerging from the door and climbed into the back of the bus.   When it was my mothers turn she said, I want to live in 
the city and be able to send out for kebabs and naan instead of cooking it myself.   

Its the same old story, my father said, and he was right.   

At night our fear is strong, Jani, he told me, but in the morning, in the light, we find our courage 
again.   

All too soon it was another year of exams.   

I grunted.   A group of us girls 
gave an interview on ATV Khyber, the only privately owned Pashto television channel, about girls 
dropping out of school due to militancy.   

I admired his mind, she says.   In my speech I told the audience 
that until I had watched the English play I had no idea there were so many talented people in Pakistan.   He even dared to enter the Radio Mullahs own village one day to speak at a school.   

The other main student organisation was Islami JamaateTalaba, the student wing of the religious 
party JamaateIslami, which was powerful in many universities in Pakistan.   It was always our 
mother who shopped for our clothes and took us to hospital if we were ill, even though in our culture, 
particularly for those of us from villages, a woman is not supposed to do these things alone.   There would be bowls of chicken, rice, local spinach and spicy mutton, all cooked over the fire 
by the women, followed by plates of crunchy apples, slices of yellow cake and a big kettle of milky 
tea.   They had jogging shoes or 
cheap plastic sandals on their feet, and sometimes stockings over their heads with holes for their eyes, 
and they blew their noses dirtily into the ends of their turbans.   We were wet and filthy by the time we got home.   
Yaseem told them he felt proud to prepare my familys food.   We can sit by and hope the government will help but they wont.   I never said those things to your clerk.   I promised 
myself Id never do such a thing again.   Besides, he had a family to provide for.   Sultana was very shorttempered and my mother did not like having 



her in the house, but my father arranged a small allowance for her and a place for Shehnaz and her 
other brother at his school.   It happened in a 
manner so dramatic that it sounds like something out of a movie.   

There was more to school than work.   Taking a rifle away from a Pashtun is 
like taking away his life, so he could not disarm the tribes.   She was a poor mother of five who picked fruit for a 
living in a village in Punjab.   It does not matter what language you choose, the important 
thing is the words you use to express yourself.   If the school has two teachers, each 
goes in for three days and signs the other in.   When we found peaches for sale we were so 
happy.   Pekai, help me resolve my contusion on this, he 
would say.   My father was worried.   

This didnt mean we went easy on the army.   So Madam Maryam and I wrote an email to General Abbas explaining the situation.   

Lunch was a disaster.   Wed be expected to cook and serve our 
brothers and fathers.   However, he got a wealthy philanthropist, Azaday Khan, to pay 
for him to produce a leaflet asking, Kia hasool e elum in bachun ka haq nahe?  Is education not 
the right of these children? My father printed thousands of these leaflets, left them at local meetings 
and distributed them around town.   She was nervous about going to Peshawar, 
which has become a nogo area for foreigners, but when she heard that I was a campaigner for girls 
education she was happy to help as she herself had been lucky to go to a good school and train to 
become a doctor.   I loved it and 
dreamed of one day going to New York and working on a magazine like her.   He told 
other boys to stop playing marbles in the dust and to play cricket instead so their clothes and hands 
wouldnt get dirty.   

We were not fans of the Taliban as we had heard they destroyed girls schools and blew up giant 
Buddha statues we had many Buddhas of our own that we were proud of.   The army was sending them to a special 
camp for jihadis to deradicalise them.   I couldnt space letters.   Ours remained a royalblue shalwar kamiz with a white 
dupatta, or headscarf, and we were advised to keep our heads covered coming in and out of school.   

If you look at a map of Swat youll see it is one long valley with little valleys we call darae off to the 
sides like the branches of a tree.   

The army action at the end of 2007 had not got rid of the Taliban.   We are peaceloving.   We all ran down the steps.   My father often used to recite the poem to 
me when I was a child but I didnt know then what it meant.   But it seemed they were too late.   
There were suicide bombings all over the country: even the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad had been 
blown up.   Fortunately at this point 
the ruling family of the United Arab Emirates stepped in.   My father said they were from the intelligence services.   But Sher Zaman did not go to college and ended up becoming a 
dispenser in the village pharmacy.   

The next morning a school worker came with milk, bread and eggs to our house for our breakfast.   The next 
morning we learned that masked militants had entered the Sangota Convent School for girls and the 
Excelsior College for boys and blown them up using improvised explosive devices (IEDs).   Underneath were the rotting heads of goats.   Next door to us the Shah of Iran had been overthrown in a revolution a few months 
earlier so the CIA had lost their main base in the region.   

We were there one week and predictably Moniba and I quarrelled.   It was such a 
small discount that most teachers did not bother, but he forced my father to apply for the rebate.   

Within a few months my mother was expecting.   We had no bathroom or kitchen, and my mother cooked on a wood 
fire on the ground and washed our clothes at a tap in the school.   

His friend Hidayatullah told him to stand firm.   Manual workers made a great 
contribution to our society but received no recognition, and this is the reason so many of them joined 
the Taliban to finally achieve status and power.   They 
believed that as Muslims they would be defiled by drinking with her.   He 
crossed the river in one of the metal boxes suspended from a pulley that we use as makeshift bridges.   The mosque also set up its 
own courts to dispense Islamic justice, saying the state had failed.   My grandfather would not buy enough gold so my father had to borrow 
more money to buy bangles.   

When our bus was called, we ran down the steps.   

The general replied in a very military way.   They praised Fazlullah and talked 
of his long hair, the way he rode a horse and behaved like the Prophet.   You should be more like Malala and do other 
things, said Madam Maryam Its just as important as your education.   It cant be repaid with expressions like thank 
you.   After neurosurgery it is essential to monitor breathing and gas exchange, and C02 
levels are supposed to be kept in the normal range.   We were lucky too that Madam Maryam was 
brave and resisted the pressure to stop working.   He spoke to me in Urdu.   On some 
mosques they set up speakers connected to radios so his broadcasts could be heard by everyone in the 
village and in the fields.   He remembered 
how mystified he had been by the river in his village, wondering where the water came from and went 
to, until he learned about the water cycle from the rain to the sea.   

In the village the day started early and even I, who liked to sleep late, woke with the sound of 
cocks crowing and the clatter of dishes as the women prepared breakfast for the men.   The terrorists even blew up the ski lift and the big hotel in Malam 
Jabba where tourists used to stay.   Mullahs from the TNSM preached that the earthquake was a warning from God.   The point is we are a Taliban state.   Everyone wanted me in their family as I was from Mingora and 
modern.   Thats why he 
decided he would make his father proud by entering the districts annual public speaking competition.   But he refused to be silent.   The soldiers had made a hole in the wall through 
which you could see the city below.   But now Im neither a widow nor a wife.   

This family rivalry meant that my father was bullied a lot by his cousins.   When my father first brought his 
wife to school, all the teachers referred to her as my brothers wife or Bhabi.   

There was a huge crowd between 30,000 and 40,000 people wearing turbans and singing 
Taliban and jihadi songs.   The army had destroyed his headquarters in Imam Deri and 
then claimed to have him surrounded in the mountains of Peochar.   All his 
books were inscribed with other boys names, never his own.   When I was in the street it felt as though every 
man I passed might be a talib.   

The hospital had been put on complete lockdown.   in the afternoon two British doctors arrived by helicopter from Rawalpindi.   

Around that time my mother was probably just going through the doorway into our school for her 
first lesson since she had left school at age six.   

There seemed to be so many things about which people were fighting.   The constant gunfire and curfews had made it impossible for the hospital to function, so he 
had moved it to Barikot.   

My friends at school said their mothers listened to the Radio Mullah although our headmistress 
Madam Maryam told us not to.   He told her the news with a heavy heart.   In reality I went back inside.   They would stop for five, ten or fifteen minutes and then start 
again the moment we drifted off to sleep.   

The Russian invasion transformed Zia from an international pariah to the great defender of freedom 
in the Cold War.   The chief minister of KPK was the first person who called.   Again we got the same, so we both got the prize.   There were even 
motorbikes with entire families balanced on them.   The boys learn the Quran by heart, rocking 
back and forth as they recite.   Sometimes I thought I heard 
footsteps behind me or imagined figures slipping into the shadows.   The walls were covered with photographs.   They werent particularly tasty fish.   One night in November 2009 he had had a very narrow escape.   

By the age of seven I was used to being top of my class.   Like most people in Swat we 
are from the Yousafzai tribe.   

In Pakistan when women say they want independence, people think this means we dont want to 
obey our fathers, brothers or husbands.   Unlike Moniba, 
who has straight hair, mine is wavy, and I liked to twist it into curls or tie it into plaits.   They were also tired of the 
endless bloodshed.   I knew that any of the girls in my class could 
have achieved what I had achieved if they had had their parents support.   The people who live in the FATA are all 
from Pashtun tribes like us Yousafzai, and live on both sides of the border with Afghanistan.   Our teachers and my parents were there too.   When you say it five times your street will be safe, and seven times will protect 
the whole area.   One of the people arrested was our old Urdu teacher who had 
refused to teach girls and had instead gone to help Fazlullahs men collect and destroy CDs and 
DVDs.   

The road up the small hill is usually busy as it is a short cut but that day it was strangely quiet.   There were 
lots of firsts although I had to miss a meal in a Chinese restaurant because I was on a TV show called 
Capital Talk.   If we dont, she may die.   What are you doing? he would ask.   I was a girl in a land where 
rifles are fired in celebration of a son, while daughters are hidden away behind a curtain, their role in 
life simply to prepare food and give birth to children.   I have a father who isn t scared, who stands by me.   The women said the missing men had not collaborated with the Taliban; maybe 
they had given them a glass of water or some bread when theyd been ordered to do so.   Unfortunately, the maliks make little difference.   He died on 
the spot and nine other people were injured.   Cases such 
as land disputes, common in our area, which used to be resolved quickly now took ten years to come 
to court.   Never in history have Khushal and Malala been friends.   After his 
visit no one else was allowed at my bedside because of the risk of infection.   We all watched in horror.   There were lots of pictures on the news of 
army helicopters laden with supplies and tents, but in many of the small valleys the helicopters could 
not land and the aid packages they dropped often rolled down slopes into rivers.   My friends and I 
didnt want that day to end so we decided to stay on for a while longer.   

In March I stopped writing my blog as Hai Kakar thought there was not much more to say.   But 
she is like my second mother.   Sufi Mohammad didnt do what he should have done.   When General Abbas came in we all stood up.   Others were asking the same thing.   But my grandfather knew that his cousin was actually much older than him.   Then he insisted and I started to weep.   In our village there was a widow called Soraya who married a 
widower from another clan which had a feud with her family.   We 
were on a school trip to Marghazar, a beautiful green valley where the air is cool, and there is a tall 
mountain and a crystalclear river where we were planning to have a picnic.   Just after midnight someone 
knocked at their door.   Malala is of Maiwand and shes the happiest person in the whole 
world.   We saw an official from the United Nations say on television that it was the worst logistical 
nightmare that the UN had ever faced.   I went and whispered Quranic verses over the books to try and protect 
them.   But now he was irritated.   Some boundaries cannot be crossed.   

Finally we got through the mountain pass at Malakand and left Swat behind.   My father was in tears as he gave her my passport and took her hand.   Its a kind of 
Romeo and Juliet story in which Gul Makai and Musa Khan meet at school and fall in love.   The drops sparkled in the sun.   

Unlike my father, I took precautions.   Madam Maryam had brought her baby boy and Hannah, her twoyearold, who looked like a 
little doll but was full of mischief.   What is going on in your school? they demanded.   Can 
you help to get him off our backs? 

Im afraid I cant help you, Ziauddin, he replied.   When he got the job he gave his age 
as much younger than my grandfather.   Im no less than Malala.   

A few days later the video was everywhere.   He went to visit the DC at his official residence and found him hosting what appeared to be a 
celebration of the Taliban takeover.   Atal was only five then and really loved that rabbit so it used to 
sleep under my parents bed.   My mother always told me, Hide your face people are looking at 
you.   Before she arrived Maryam had called to warn her, 
When you see Malala dont cry or shout.   In olden times Swat was called Uddyana, which means garden.   
Sunni comes from the Arabic for one who follows the traditions of the Prophet.   
O God, please make Malala well, prayed my father.   We needed to visit the mausoleum of 
our founder and great leader Mohammad Ali Jinnah.   Terror had made people 
cruel.   The other girls all covered their heads before 
emerging from the door and climbing up into the back.   

My father longed to be eloquent with a voice that boomed out with no stammer, and he knew my 
grandfather desperately wanted him to be a doctor, but though he was a very bright student and a 
gifted poet, he was poor at maths and science and felt he was a disappointment.   She became a good friend of mine 
and of Monibas, which sometimes caused fights as three is a tricky number.   

My father was at his wits end and wept with frustration.   

When my father read it, he went pale.   

The village was a forgotten place.   Go and ask the manager of the White Palace Hotel and 
he will tell you what these girls did .   

As my father was still teaching, Naeem wandered the streets looking for somewhere to rent.   I have trouble in my home too.   

One day we found our teacher Miss Hammeda in floods of tears.   Nobody remembered.   He and his family lived 
with my grandfather, and whenever he saved up enough of his salary, they built a small concrete hujra 
at the side of the house for guests.   The important thing is what you learn 
from it.   My mother made our usual breakfast of sugary tea, 
chapatis and fried egg.   LeT had close links to the ISI and was set up to liberate Kashmir, which we believe should be 
part of Pakistan not India as its population is mostly Muslim.   No Pakistani, including my father, thought this deal would 
work as Musharraf and Benazir hated each other.   She refused even to be 
photographed.   To cure a disease before 
its onset is not in accordance with sharia law, said Fazlullah on the radio.   That day instead of a story he did a magic trick to make a 
pebble disappear.   



Is he right, Aba? I asked my father.   Across 
the tribal areas people were angry and many joined militant groups or formed lashkars, local militias.   His men began killing khans and 
political activists from secular and nationalist parties, especially the Awami National Party (ANP).   Inside the HQ we saw offices 
with banks of televisions, men monitoring every channel, and one officer showed my father a thick 
file of cuttings which contained every mention of the army in that days papers.   He wanted to show the human side of the catastrophe in 
Swat.   Swat would be Swat just with a different justice system I wanted to believe this but I 
was worried.   We also heard that an army brigadier 
went to prayers led by Fazlullah.   

Many of the militants in the mosque had fought in Afghanistan or Kashmir.   

The mufti started to object but my father had had enough.   At that time 
suicide bombings were rare in Pakistan there were six in total that year and it was the biggest 
attack that had ever been carried out by Pakistani militants.   He was from Mingora, and his body had been brought back for the funeral and a police 
salute.   They had been sent by General Kayani after the British doctors had reported 
back to him that if I was left in Peshawar I would suffer brain damage or might even die because of 
the quality of the care and the high risk of infection.   They convinced themselves that the shariat in Swat would be 
different to the Afghan version we would still have our girls schools and there would be no 
morality police.   I knew we were better off than those who lived in the camps, 
queuing for food and water for hours under the hot sun, but I missed my valley.   We knew this would not be the end, but my father 
argued that if we had shariat the Taliban would have nothing more to fight for.   Was the deal merely an illusion? she 
wondered.   

Inside the helicopter I was vomiting blood.   They 
felt incomplete without me.   

When we landed in Peshawar, they assumed wed be taken to Lady Reading Hospital, where there 
was a very good neurosurgeon called Dr Mumtaz who had been recommended.   My mother was very confused by all the different stories, first that my foot had been injured, 
then that I had been shot in the head.   I had shared a cake with my friends.   I needed to concentrate on winning the war.   

The colonel then said, Lets go to the hospital as there are other documents to sign.   

They took me for another CT scan.   What they did was like our traditional jirgas the 
Americans paid blood money amounting to $2.   

Mr Khan, my father said to him, you know what happened to the people of Afghanistan.   For a while her daughters also had to collect 
rubbish to survive.   Many of my friends had left the valley so they could be educated in Peshawar, but my father 
insisted we would not leave.   Hardly any 
women from these areas can read.   Many people were scared.   

I had amassed a lot of money by the end of that year half a million rupees each from the prime 
minister, the chief minister of Punjab, the chief minister of our state Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the 
Sindh government.   How could they stop more than 50,000 girls from going to school in the twenty first 
century? I kept hoping something would happen and the schools would remain open.   

One day I went on Geo, which is one of the biggest news channels in our country.   There was some argument 
until Dr Javid made it clear who had sent them.   Baba also gave him a 
deep love of learning and knowledge as well as a keen awareness of peoples rights, which my father 
has passed on to me.   She had a little money of her own so they 
used it to hire a van and she moved to Mingora.   I was 
relieved that the Pakistan Studies exam had gone well so I agreed.   These two are spreading secularism and should be killed, it said.   We cant disown our 
campaign! 

People were asking me to speak at events.   He told them that nowhere in Islam is this required.   He was worried about how 
confused I would be.   Then, under 
the pretext of bringing in aid, they could legitimately enter Pakistan and spy on all our secrets.   They offered us 
guards but my father was reluctant.   At that time talib simply meant religious 
student.   We had been away from our valley for almost three months and as 
we drove back past 

Churchills Picket, past the ancient ruins on the hill and the giant Buddhist stupa, we saw the wide 
Swat River and my father began to weep.   But the second time they will steal 
something bigger and the third something bigger still.   When girls disappeared it was not 
always because they had been married off.   We had been so happy, then something very bad had 
come into our lives and we were now waiting for our happy ending.   Education is neither Eastern nor Western, it is human.   If you go around with a lot of security the Taliban will use Kalashnikovs or 
suicide bombers and more people will be killed, he said.   

It was around the time he was praying to go to heaven as a martyr that he met my mothers brother, 
Faiz Mohammad, and started mixing with her family and going to her fathers hujra.   Jinnah smoked fifty cigarettes a day.   We 
did another paper at school to see who would get the prize and again we got equal marks.   
Many people protested outside courthouses or put up posters of their missing but got nowhere.   Her brother 
had been picked up by the army, put in leg irons and tortured, and then kept in a fridge until he died.   



My father consulted my mother on everything.   She was then furious when she learned that my father did not get a good 
price for them.   And my 
ankles click when I walk, which makes adults squirm.   He 
was very kind and sent us 1,100,000 rupees so my father could pay everyone three months backpay.   No one 
doubted they were serious.   They acted as couriers for bin Laden.   

We went to shops where I bought school books and Adam bought me DVDs of American TV 
programmes like Ugly Betty, which was about a girl with big braces and a big heart.   Thats why I dont want to greet you 

Then one of the other men spoke up.   My father was astonished and pleased 
 in our country few doctors bother explaining anything to an illiterate woman.   I replied, If there is a snake and a lion 
coming to attack us what would we say is good, the snake or lion? 

Our school was a haven from the horrors outside.   They had to pay 
them rent in kind, usually a share of their crop.   

On top of that, there was a stream of guests from Shangla now that my father had a place for them to 
stay.   I wanted to start an education foundation.   We had played together as children and later he told me he was in love with me.   Visitors can turn up 
whenever they wish and can stay as long as they want.   He said, You 
are a child and it s your right to speak.   They 
retreated after just twelve days and reached what they called a negotiated peace settlement with 
local militant leaders like Nek Mohammad.   But God has also given us 
the power to forget, so that when the tragedy is over we carry on as normal.   My father didnt attend the 
gathering.   She told me her name was Rehanna and she was the Muslim chaplain.   I wished I had her whitelily skin, fine features and green 
eyes, but instead had inherited the sallow complexion, wide nose and brown eyes of my father.   The swelling had gone down and my blood levels had improved.   Some people 
said that Fazlullah had been captured but that the army and the ISI couldnt agree on what to do with 
him.   This means soulmate in Persian, and he always called me that at 
the start of the day.   Some fifty men deserted from the Frontier Corps and another fortyeight were 
captured and then paraded around.   People hoped that the Taliban would settle down, go back to their 
homes and live as peaceful citizens.   I was shot by a Taliban bullet and was 
flown out of Pakistan unconscious.   I was astonished to see so many channels.   His own 
education in Delhi had been free he had lived like a talib in the mosques, and local people had 
provided the students with food and clothes.   Before Abbottabad hed 
been in Haripur and before that hidden away in our own Swat Valley, where he met Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammad, the mastermind of 9/ 1 1 .   Then three top surgeons from the 
province came to examine me.   Now wait, we are coming to 
Islamabad, he shouted.   My fathers heart sank.   The Taliban think we are not Muslims but we are.   If one man, Fazlullah, can destroy everything, why 
can t one girl change it? I wondered.   

Some people even claimed the video was fake.   He had written, Now you have become very popular, I still love 
you and know you love me.   Life isnt just about taking in oxygen and giving out carbon dioxide.   Pakistan took its place.   Finally on the evening of 3 July 
commandos with tanks and armoured personnel carriers surrounded the mosque.   The whole episode had been a matter of botched bureaucracy.   On some shelves were all the goldcoloured 
plastic cups and trophies I had won for coming first in my class.   He joked to my father that if either of them had relatives 
to stay, they should pay a fine.   He 
had been shot several times and his throat partly slit.   

They know no one will ask the manager, said my father.   The mighty Indus River, which flows from the Himalayas 
down through KPK and Punjab to Karachi and the Arabian Sea, and of which we are so proud, had 
turned into a raging torrent and burst its banks.   

Our street could not be reached by car, so coming home I would get off the bus on the road below 
by the stream and go through a barred iron gate and up a flight of steps.   A 


At school my father organised a peace march and encouraged us to speak out against what was 
happening.   

The bus did two trips every day, and that day we took the second one.   My father also designed a shield with a famous quote from Khattak in 
Pashto: I girt my sword in the name of Afghan honour.   

Not everyone was happy about the deal.   The army and Taliban had fought street to street and almost every wall was 
pockmarked with bullet holes.   My father was disappointed 
when I didnt win but I pointed out to him that all I had done was speak out; we didnt have an 
organisation doing practical things like the award winners had.   President Obama 
was very happy, and on TV we watched big celebrations take place outside the White House.   They had collected money and organised a 
party for me with a big white cake on which was written success forever in chocolate icing.   The name was ironic and my father often 
laughed about it, but the organisations aim was serious: to preserve the environment of Swat and 
promote peace and education among local people.   We were all horrified by the attack and 
people swore revenge.   I guess he ended up 
somewhere in the middle.   

When he returned a few days later he was ashen.   I had become interested in journalism after seeing how my 
own words could make a difference and also from watching the Ugly Betty DVDs about life at an 
American magazine.   Very 



quickly the Taliban controlled most of Swat outside Mingora.   Two more schools were 
blown up and three foreign aid workers from a Christian group were kidnapped as they returned to 
their base in Mingora and then murdered.   She had known my father since she was ten and they 
trusted each other completely she used to signal to him to wind up when he spoke for too long, 
which was often! 

The secret school is our silent protest, she told us.   I could 
see in his eyes that I had failed him I wanted him to be proud of me, like he was when I was 
presented with the first inyear trophies at school.   The helipad was only a mile away, a fiveminute drive, 
but he was scared the whole way.   My father used to grumble, Were a school not a poultry farm.   Our American allies were furious.   Only my father and some journalists 
went.   

Under Zias regime life for women in Pakistan became much more restricted.   With all the bad stuff going on in those days, we needed small, small reasons to laugh.   Not a single day passes without the killing of at least one Pakistani.   When my brothers came along and Baba 
wanted to pay, my father refused as he hadnt done this for me.   A hospital protected by the Taliban was not a good idea so he 
refused.   As ever, 
they ignored me and carried on with their war games.   It was strange to think that Bangladesh was once part of Pakistan 
despite being a thousand miles away.   It was easy.   His own father was just an ordinary soldier and 
died young, leaving him as the eldest son of eight to support his entire family.   

It was after the Red Mosque siege that the Swat Taliban changed.   The nurses and doctors were speaking English though they 
seemed to all be from different countries.   The army had wanted to imprison him, but the intelligence service had prevailed and taken him 
to Bajaur so that he could slip across the border to Afghanistan.   

Dont worry replied my father.   I dont want keys, I want my daughter! my mother cried.   She 
insisted we leave, but my father was exhausted and we Muslims believe our fate is written by God.   None of them had ever been on a helicopter.   General Zia was invited to meet 
President Ronald Reagan at the White House and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher at 10 Downing 
Street.   Our guests need the bathroom and everyone is having 
to wait for you 

One of the worst times was the fasting month of Ramadan in 2008.   

When I overheard my father talking about this, I said, Why not me? I wanted people to know what 
was happening.   Thats why I have problems with our Pashtunwali code.   It seemed like the whole world was outraged.   All the other girls in my class wanted to be 
doctors, but I decided I wanted to be an inventor and make an antiTaliban machine which would sniff 
them out and destroy their guns.   My family and I sat on the rocks, 
gazing across the water, breathing in the salt tang of the Arabian Sea.   If you do this you will get paid now and also receive a reward in 
the next world.   

We spent that first night in the home of Dr Afzal.   Where will we go? we begged.   They assumed their passports and visas were being processed and 
they would join me in a few days.   Everything was silent, pindrop silent.   

People liked to hear him talk, and I loved the evenings when guests visited.   She will cook and wash for us.   She speaks 
better English than the rest of you and youre translating for her! We all laughed.   We hid our school bags and our books in our shawls.   I thought if anyone attacked me 
it would be on those steps.   Tell me how can one 
live without daughters, he sobbed.   

That morning we arrived in the narrow mud lane off Haji Baba Road in our usual procession of 
brightly painted rickshaws, sputtering diesel fumes, each one crammed with five or six girls.   When my father refused, a bill arrived with a large fine.   

The army still had their guns trained on the mountains overlooking Mingora.   Safinas mother next door had deposited her 



gold in a bank vault for safekeeping and even that had been looted.   I wrote a sketch based on Romeo 
and Juliet about corruption.   How many teachers do you have? Three! Your teachers are not trained.   I did not like going barefoot.   They would visit 
only once a year, and usually a new baby would arrive nine months later.   My mother put it best.   Instead he would tell his best 
students to keep their old books for my father at the end of the year and then he would be sent to their 
homes to get them.   He would probably say that this was not the country he had wanted.   It was as though they wanted to remove all traces of womankind 
from public life.   Overlooking 
the river were tourist restaurants with big glass windows we had never been to.   My grandfather, Janser Khan, had been listening to Radio Afghanistan just 
before she was born and heard the name.   She can hear you even if you think she cant.   

My father was very impressed by Faiz Mohammad and thought he talked a lot of sense, particularly 
about wanting to end the feudal and capitalist systems in our country, where the same big families had 
controlled things for years while the poor got poorer.   
Though Afghans are renowned fighters, Colonel Imam, the officer heading the programme, 
complained that trying to organise them was like weighing frogs.   I quickened my pace and after a 
while I looked back to see if he was following me.   Our people are being killed, but this 
Ziauddin is so outspoken and hes still alive! He must be a secret agent! Actually he had been 
threatened too but hadnt told us.   My father says that Pakistan has been cursed with more than its fair share of politicians 
who only think about money.   We 
saw pictures on the news of what people were calling the Burqa Brigade young women and girls 
like us in burqas with sticks, attacking CD and DVD shops in bazaars in the centre of Islamabad.   But some people supported 
them because the very religious Pashtuns were angry at the American invasion of Afghanistan and the 
removal of the Taliban from power there.   

My father was again busy speaking at seminars on our troubles with the Taliban.   But now they seemed to be more 
alarmed about Pakistan than Afghanistan.   Our weddings go on for several days of feasting.   

Later that day we visited my aunt and uncle.   



We remembered how scared we had been that morning and started raising money at school.   Everything will be fine.   

It was April 2012, the month after our exams so we were all feeling relaxed.   After paying the rent and salaries, there was little 
money left for food.   The city was silent and emptied of people and 
traffic as if a plague had descended.   What skin 
cream are you using? I asked her.   It 
was because of Benazir that girls like me could think of speaking out and becoming politicians.   

Lots of buildings were surrounded by concrete blocks, and there were checkpoints for incoming 
vehicles to guard against suicide bombs.   My grandfather wrote his speeches 
and he almost always came first, gaining a reputation locally as an impressive speaker.   

In Swat it was safer in the town than in the remote areas and many of our family came from the 
countryside to stay with us.   In the autumn chill winds would 
come.   Pashtuns cannot stand anyone belittling them, nor was he about to pay a 
bribe for something he was entitled to.   

The talib talked of jihad in such glorious terms that my father was captivated.   We flew to 
Karachi, and it was the first time any of us had ever been on a plane.   It was 
also a way to answer growing American criticism that our military was helping the Taliban rather 
than trying to stop them.   A couple of 
weeks after Shabanas murder, a teacher in Matta was killed when he refused to pull his shalwar 
above the ankle the way the Taliban wore theirs.   You should 
close it.   Some people, like me, get caught and vow they will never do it again.   What we knew and they didnt was that 
the mufti s own niece attended the school in secret.   

We usually stayed in Barkana at my grandfathers house, where my father grew up.   The phone did not stop ringing.   It 
looked like the remains of someones dinner.   

The people in Sewoor were Gujars, Kohistanis and Mians.   We wont give him the building but be careful.   It was run by 
two brothers, Abdul Aziz and Abdul Rashid, and had become a centre for spreading propaganda 
about bin Laden whom Abdul Rashid had met in Kandahar when visiting Mullah Omar.   Luckily, a neighbour called Mr Amanuddin took them in 
for the night.   Then they said he was badly 
injured and that they had his spokesman, Muslim Khan, in custody.   

Moniba, Ayesha and I also started learning about journalism from a British organisation called the 
Institute for War and Peace Reporting, which ran a project called Open Minds Pakistan.   I had never seen them so busy before.   You teach girls and have a uniform that is un Islamic.   That was the last time I saw him.   It was my 
mother who would wake up early in the morning, iron our school clothes, make our breakfast and 
teach us how to behave.   Our 
biggest intelligence service belongs to the military and is called the ISI.   Another lady told me 
her son was missing.   
Sometimes it felt as though it was all about the money.   In the name of Allah, I am dying! 

You could hear the Taliban shouting, Hold her down.   It must be 
Malala! they said.   There are two powers 
in the world; one is the sword and the other is the pen.   A man came near my 
mother and she took her shoe off and hit him once then twice and he ran away.   People jokingly referred to the MMA as the Mullah Military 
Alliance and said they got elected because they had Musharraf s support.   

The army was in shock.   She chatted with me for a while then with my father.   My father is so 
charismatic that Hidayatullah says he is the kind of person who, if invited to your house, will make 
friends with your friends.   They had to pay a fine they could 
not afford.   I was only eleven but I looked older, and the media seemed to like hearing from 
a young girl.   My father said this was rubbish.   

This was the start of real trouble.   Every channel was showing footage of me with a commentary of prayers and moving poems as if I 
had died.   My father would say to her, Pekai, purdah is not only in the veil, purdah is in the heart.   Even so, it all seemed far, far away from our peaceful garden valley.   
So when a new girl named MalkaeNoor joined our class, I didnt think anything of it.   Sometimes their roadblocks were less than a 
kilometre apart on the same main roads.   

Fortunately the Taliban had disappeared.   The last few shops as we headed north out of Mingora 
were wooden shacks that seemed to lean on each other, in front of which were piles of reconditioned 
tyres for the bad roads ahead.   Am I 
the only person who can fetch it? he wondered.   An American senator said 
that the only thing missing from bin Laden s hideaway was a neon sign .   When she paraded on an opentop bus through the streets, hundreds of 
thousands of people flocked to see her.   
Now we had become the valley of sorrows, said my cousin Sultan Rome.   

We lived in the shadow of the Hindu Kush mountains, where the men went to shoot ibex and golden 
cockerels.   



My fathers friend Ahmad Shah called it a controlled peace, not a durable peace.   It was 
wonderful that my friends wanted to share in my success.   In these tough days we must be strong for 
our valley, he said.   

When he got to the hospital only one other member of the jirga committee was there.   Their wives and children are still waiting for them I remember visiting them and feeling 
their longing.   He 
was hoping to build a political consensus behind launching an allout attack on the Taliban.   .   Jajai replaced his late mother as the most important woman in my fathers life.   

In our culture speeches are usually written by our fathers, uncles or teachers.   Osama bin Laden, 
the leader of alQaeda, had been living in Kandahar when the attack on the World Trade Center 
happened, and the Americans had sent thousands of troops to Afghanistan to catch him and overthrow 
the Taliban regime which had protected him.   Sit inside, Atal Khan, or 
I wont take you! he said.   I wanted to talk to the children but I was too scared.   Then Haroon went away to army cadet college.   My 
fathers close friend Wahid Zamans brother and brotherinlaw were among the many who went to 
Afghanistan.   

Jinnah had lived in London as a young man and trained as a barrister.   

The mullah looked down embarrassed because greeting someone properly is important in Islam.   Id go outside and make sure the front gate was locked.   
The nurse took him into a room.   In our society if someone dies, you feel very honoured if 
one dignitary comes to your home.   When we got there the helicopter had not arrived, and we waited 
for what to him felt like hours inside the ambulance.   Our home is in Shangla.   

My grandmother was so worried about my fathers stutter that when he was still a young boy she 
took him to see a holy man.   How could he have lived so close to the 
capital just sixty miles away? And for so long! Maybe the best place to hide is in plain sight, but he 
had been living in that house since the 2005 earthquake.   Sometimes a group of girls would go down to the river 
for a picnic with pots of rice and sherbet.   His execution shocked everybody and made Pakistan look bad all around the world.   There was mud, mud, mud 
everywhere.   It was a recipe 
for another argument between Moniba and me.   My father was alarmed how would they 
know how to deal with head wounds? But Dr Fiona assured him it had the best intensive care in 
Pakistan with stateoftheart equipment and Britishtrained doctors.   
The most important jobs in the army, bureaucracy and government are all taken by Punjabis because 
they come from the biggest and most powerful province.   The other girls stirred things up, what we call putting masala on the situation.   There 
was no hospital.   I was talking to Moniba, my wise, nice friend.   Her family had moved to 
Karachi to get away from the conflict and, as a woman, she could not live alone.   

My father knew what he was referring to.   Why are you afraid? he asked.   To represent the Taliban they had Muslim Khan, who 
wasnt in the studio.   What about this bone? What will you do with it? 

After three months we will put it back, replied Dr Mumtaz.   In our Islamic studies class at school we used to write 
essays entitled How the Prophet Lived.   Mullahs often misinterpret the 
Quran and Hadith when they teach them in our country as few people understand the original Arabic.   Musicians took out adverts in the papers saying they had stopped playing and 
were pledging to live pious lives to appease the Taliban.   I dreamed of going to the top of Mount Elum like Alexander the Great to touch Jupiter and even 
beyond the valley.   My mother was sitting on the floor pounding 
spices, brightly coloured turmeric and cumin, filling the air with their aroma.   When we reached Mingora 
we were shocked.   This is a very 
special verse and we believe that if you say it three times at night your home will be safe from 
shayatin or devils.   We would cry in terror, though in 
fact as toe and finger in Pashto is the same, we were all twenty fingered, but we didnt realise.   She saw 
their men were losing, and when the flagbearer fell she lifted her white veil up high and marched 
onto the battlefield in front of the troops.   

As we crossed the Malakand Pass I saw a young girl selling oranges.   

Then we went into the classrooms.   But two years after I was born the generals again took over.   In the next room was a soldier who had been horrifically burned in an IED attack 
and had a leg blown off.   Her name was Shiza 
Shahid and she came from Islamabad.   We should not kill her.   

My father prayed they would agree, but my grandfather asked them as soon as they arrived, 
exhausted after the threeday bus journey, and his soninlaw refused outright.   I see my parents happy and laughing a lot.   I looked at the honours board and wondered if my name would ever 
appear on it again.   You just splashed water and took pictures, 
so dont be scared.   He was an impatient man at the best of times and would fly into a rage 
over the smallest thing like a hen going astray or a cup getting broken.   Then we remembered General Abbas and his visiting card.   

I have a solution, said my father.   He 
brought her to the hospital on the back of his motorbike, something very rare for a respectable Pashtun 
woman.   They liked his talk of bringing back Islamic law as everyone was frustrated with the 
Pakistani justice system, which had replaced ours when we were merged into the country.   We want to be free to go to school or to go to work.   I was the one who would help other pupils 
who had difficulties.   Why should we change our names thats what criminals do.   

A man goes out to work, he earns a wage, he comes back home, he eats, he sleeps.   

Soon the house was full of women.   
Because of his role as spokesman for the Swat Qaumi Jirga, he acted as a kind of liaison between the 
people and the army.   But just like during the earthquake, it was mainly volunteers 
from Islamic groups who were the first to arrive in the more remote and isolated areas with aid.   I noticed my father was not very happy with this.   They believed 
any statue or painting was haram, sinful and therefore prohibited.   It was as if everyone had been waiting for 
someone else to start.   We couldnt 
believe the army had been oblivious to bin Laden s whereabouts.   
Then he asked, Please, can you bring in Dr Mumtaz? 

How would that look? replied Colonel Junaid who was, not surprisingly, offended.   She was diabetic and had seen a TV advert for 
a doctor in Lahore with some miracle treatment and persuaded my uncle to take her there.   The anger wasnt just in Pakistan.   But my 
mother was very composed and courageous.   Landslides blocked access to the worst affected 
parts and all the phones and power lines were down.   General Zia had promised to be in power for ninety days and had 
stayed more than eleven years until he was killed in an air crash.   She might even kill you.   They had their own website and pirate FM station 
on which they broadcast, just like Fazlullah.   The numbers were unbelievable.   Sometimes his men would display the fancy clothes that they said they had taken from 
decadent women to shame them.   Foreign governments pointed out that most of our politicians werent 
paying any income tax, so it was a bit much to ask hardpressed taxpayers in their own countries to 
contribute.   She thought I would think it strange that she hadnt come to me, 
but people told her not to go as I was either dead or about to be moved.   

But I thought the bullet hadnt entered her brain, said my father.   All the private schools were in the same boat.   

That first morning, just a few hours after my operation, there was suddenly a flurry of activity, people 
neatening their uniforms and clearing up.   

My brothers immediately rushed off to check on their pet chickens.   She had seen the New York Times documentary Class 
Dismissed in Swat Valley and tracked us down.   When he appeared in court even lawyers 
showered him with rose petals.   There 
was even a headmaster from Shangla who would boast that his greatest success was to send ten boys 
in Grade 9 for jihad training in Kashmir.   

Our week at the guesthouse soon ended and we went to Haripur, where one of my aunts lived.   

In Pakistan we were still under a dictatorship, but America needed our help, just as it had in the 
1980s to fight the Russians in Afghanistan.   The fire is reaching the valley.   We dumped our backpacks in our rooms then gathered for morning assembly under the 
sky, our backs to the mountains as we stood to attention.   

The ceremony was on 20 December 2011 at the prime ministers official residence, one of the big 
white mansions on the hill at the end of Constitution Avenue which I had seen on my trip to 
Islamabad.   

My father said it was a shameful day.   Suddenly there was the crack of gunfire and an 
explosion as a suicide bomber blew himself up by the side of her vehicle.   

Yes, Malala, he replied.   They had travelled from all over the country and many of them 
were carrying small children.   Then in the evening, when the white peak of Spin Ghar was 
even more beautiful than in the morning, we said the makkam or evening prayers.   My father had taken down the Khushal School sign and left it in the courtyard.   A while later we heard that 
she had two children.   But he had been lucky.   It sounded like a disease.   I am staying here.   As a nation we have always been good at hockey, but Zia made 



our female hockey players wear baggy trousers instead of shorts, and stopped women playing some 
sports altogether.   The temples are 
long gone, but almost anywhere you go in Swat, amid all the primroses and other wild flowers, you 
find their remains.   When 
the NGOs received threatening letters from the Taliban and went to the DC to ask for his help, he 
wouldnt even listen to them.   Was 
it because of the cry of a woman? 

When the waters receded, they found their home and school destroyed: their furniture, carpets, 
books, clothes and the audio system entirely caked in thick foulsmelling mud.   This is 
the path that he would later show me.   

My uncle was more dutiful.   
More than 73,000 people had been killed and 128,000 injured, many of them permanently disabled.   
Write your name as Ziauddin Shaheen, he told him.   It was just one question worth only one mark, but it made me feel that 
something devastating was going to happen.   

Then I was in class one day when my classmates said, You have won a big prize and half a 
million rupees! My father told me the government had awarded me Pakistans first ever National 
Peace Prize.   If any of his children accidentally spilt their food he would fly into a rage.   The hospital was 
only five minutes away.   You will not find a single 
child to drink a drop of the vaccine anywhere in Swat.   It might have 
changed the whole world but we were living right in the epicentre of everything.   Not 
everyone wanted to as they said the children were dirty and probably diseased, and their parents 
would not like them going to school with children like that.   

When my mother arrived they hugged and held back tears.   

When my parents finally got back to the hostel it was with a very heavy heart.   The groups main objective 
was to liberate Kashmirs Muslims from Indian rule, but they had recently also become active in 
Afghanistan.   In high school I read some Sherlock Holmes and laughed to see that this was the same battle 
where Dr Watson was wounded before becoming partner to the great detective.   

We Pashtuns know the stone of revenge never decays, and when you do something wrong you will 
face the music.   Not only was Peshawar dangerous for Westerners but after googling 
me she realised this was no ordinary case.   But she never banned me from doing anything.   When they came to our house I would bring them tea then sit quietly listening as they discussed 
what to do.   Exams were due in March but how could they take place? Coming first didnt 
matter if you couldnt study at all.   Im not against you personally, I just 
want every girl to go to school.   

Its coming here, my father warned.   Suddenly we could 
witness these events on television.   

The mullah clearly wasnt happy as he wanted the school closed altogether.   Even today, when 
most of the foreign aid agencies have gone, shattered buildings still line the roadside and people are 
still waiting for compensation from the government to build new houses, the JuD banners and helpers 
are still present.   

My father argued that all he had ever wanted was to create a school in which children could learn.   

As we got older the village began to seem boring.   Even so my father insisted on starting the day in style by singing the national anthem.   

My mother was excited to be in Mingora.   

Their radio coverage spread across the valley and neighbouring districts.   Most of us had stayed with friends or family but some had 
been in the camps.   Wed also heard that many homes had been looted.   Soon mullahs all over Pakistan were 
denouncing the book, calling for it to be banned, and angry demonstrations were held.   

We have a special history too.   To my joy I found my 
school bag still packed with my books, and I gave thanks that my prayers had been answered and that 
they were safe. .   It was both odd and wonderful to see my name on a school just like my namesake 
Malalai of Maiwind, after whom so many schools in Afghanistan are named.   She always says, I have four brothers, and if I do even the slightest thing wrong they can stop 
me going to school.   Fazlullah closed beauty parlours and banned shaving so 
there was no work for barbers.   

Then I went and sat on my bed.   

At night the village was very dark with just oil lamps twinkling in houses on the hills.   They were waiting 
for you to come clean but you just kept on.   It was the biggest bomb ever to have gone off in our country.   If anything he became more outspoken, 
particularly against the intelligence agencies, as he was convinced they were behind the Taliban.   Zahid Khan was a hotel owner and had a big 
hujra.   Why are we here? I thought wed go to the civil hospital.   She is a 
wise girl, though we often fall out, particularly when we go on school trips.   Nurses and doctors kept coming in and out.   We 
were supposed to be allies and we had lost more soldiers in their War on Terror than they had.   But then Maryam noticed me trying to wipe my mouth with my 
scarf.   The Taliban agreed to a tenday truce and, as a peace gesture, released a Chinese telephone 
engineer who they had kidnapped six months before.   One day I want to cross 
this sea, I said.   

For a while his Muslim identity seemed more important than anything else in his life.   

Maybe they have poor eyesight, we laughed, and cant see them.   

I felt a terrible sinking feeling in my stomach.   The 
senior elder was a whitebearded man of seventy four called Abdul Khan Khaliq who had been one 
of the Queens bodyguards when she had visited Swat to stay with our wali.   Then we crammed in, fighting over the window seats even though the panes 
were so encrusted with dirt it was hard to see out of them The sides of Swat buses are painted with 
scenes of bright pink and yellow flowers, neonorange tigers and snowy mountains.   We visited the Faisal Mosque at the base of the Margalla Hills, which was built by the Saudis 
for millions of rupees.   
My father tried to counter their propaganda but it was hard.   In the bazaar you could buy posters 
of him on a white horse and boxes of sweets with his picture on them.   
Hidayatullah was furious.   Why not your 
own hospital? General Kayani asked.   I couldnt 
think straight.   My 
parents first child was stillborn but I popped out kicking and screaming.   It was exam time so school 
started at nine instead of eight, which was good as I dont like getting up and can sleep through the 
crows of the cocks and the prayer calls of the muezzin.   1 congratulate her.   The 
military finally lost patience and stormed the compound.   

On 17 June 2004 an unmanned Predator dropped a Hellfire missile on Nek Mohammad in South 
Waziristan apparently while he was giving an interview by satellite phone.   Not because of girls like me and my school but because our 
country has more than 200 nuclear warheads and they were worried about who was going to control 
them.   

I know my mother didnt like the awards because she feared I would become a target as I was 
becoming more well known.   

I had done a lot of television interviews and enjoyed speaking into the microphone so much that my 
friends would tease me.   It could hardly have been a 
bloodier beginning.   

One day I saw my father and his friends watching a video on his phone.   Did all this fighting mean we needed 
to divide our country yet again? 

When we left the museum some young men with flags were protesting outside.   I dont think that Paulo Coelho had come across the Taliban or our useless politicians.   He knew if she had been alive, she would have been on his side.   Near our home was a field scattered with mysterious ruins statues of lions on 
their haunches, broken columns, headless figures and, oddest of all, hundreds of stone umbrellas.   He made us all laugh with 
his crazy stories.   She was pro 
West; she was speaking against the Taliban; she was calling President Obama her idol.   

In Swat we began to see more signs that the Taliban had never really left.   
Then MMA activists launched attacks on cinemas and tore down billboards with pictures of women 
or blacked them out with paint.   It was the first time I had ever visited.   He raged against the Lai Masjid attack and vowed to avenge the death of Abdul Rashid.   I never noticed before how beautiful her eyes 
are, said Maryam.   But 
first we need to educate our girls so they can become teachers! 

One day Sufi Mohammad proclaimed from jail that there should be no education for women even at 
girls madrasas.   Sangota 



school has been there since the 1960s and never converted anyone to Christianity in fact some of 
them converted to Islam.   They were 
now state sanctioned terrorists.   When the school assistants put the pans on the fire to heat up the chicken 
curry, they panicked that there was not enough food for so many girls and added water from the 
stream.   Police once tried to capture Fazlullah when he was speaking at a gathering, but a giant 
sandstorm blew up and he managed to escape.   We cant 
afford all this entertaining! Naeem would complain.   So he went to 
the school most days and actually tried to teach the children.   But the pencil mark stayed stubbornly at five feet.   Her grandmother my 
great grandmother was widowed when her children were young, and her eldest son Janser Khan 
was locked up because of a tribal feud with another family when he was only nine.   It was the peach and onion season and farmers were desperate to save their 
harvests.  8 million population had left 
our valley.   This is a very peaceful building of white marble 
and somehow seemed separate from the hustle and bustle of the city.   The worst thing that can happen to a Pashtun is loss of face.   

The next day we heard that the school had been flooded.   

After a couple of rulers who did not work out, in 1917 the chiefs settled on a man called Miangul 
Abdul Wadood as their king.   

On the last day of February 2008 I was in the kitchen when we heard an enormous blast.   Now the Talibanisation is especially for us, for those like you and me 
who continue to speak out.   Children in the refugee camps were even given school textbooks produced by 
an American university which taught basic arithmetic through fighting.   Youre worried about something but youre not telling us.   We were told she had committed 
suicide, but we later discovered her own family had poisoned her.   They also said it wasnt up to us to sort 
out the problem.   Sadly we could not see the walis room as it had been damaged by the floods.   
In the town of Muzaffarabad in Azad Kashmir the JuD even set up a large field hospital with Xray 
machines, an operating theatre, a wellstocked pharmacy and a dental department.   I was determined it would not happen 
again.   I am 
representing good Muslims and we all think your girls school is haram and a blasphemy.   These are bad days.   Two days later Ayatollah 
Khomeini, the supreme leader of Iran, issued a fatwa calling for Rushdies assassination.   To be torn from the country that you love is not something to wish on anyone.   He promised that the gas supply had been restored and that the banks were reopening, and 
called on the people of Swat to return.   

As my father had found with Naeem, it is not easy to mix business and friendship.   Once again our 
country was expelled from the Commonwealth and became an international black sheep.   I was to be flown out of Pakistan for the first time in my life in the early hours 
of Monday, 15 October.   O God, let 
me give the rest of my life to her; I have lived enough.   One target of 



the Taliban were non governmental organisations or NGOs, which they said were antiIslam.   Some people took sacks of sugar and flour, and most of the baggage was tied to the top of 
the bus in a towering pile.   
The assembly was elected for a year and we met almost every month.   

Our Butkara ruins were a magical place to play hide and seek.   I was only 
eleven years old and already I wished it could.   If they were 
going to kill me they would have done it in 2009, I said.   Mama, he wept, Malala is hurt so badly.   She had not been at 
school that day but at home nursing her baby when she received a phone call from her brotherinlaw 
checking she was safe.   Moniba put it well.   

I was confused by Fazlullahs words.   

Usman Bhai Jan started the dyna and we were off.   Neither the students nor the teachers were supposed to have their own opinions, and 
the owners control was so tight they even frowned upon friendship between teachers.   We saw 
the Red Mosque where the siege had taken place, the wide, wide Constitution Avenue leading to the 
whitecolonnaded buildings of the Parliament House and the Presidency, where Zardari now lived.   .   He felt ashamed but had no choice if he didnt want to end up illiterate.   If they killed him then I 
can put the children in an orphanage.   It was also there that my father met his 



mentor Akbar Khan, who although he had not gone to college himself lent my father money so he 
could.   

Within six months people were getting rid of their TVs, DVDs and CDs.   I have three good friends Safina 
from my area, Sumbul from the village and Moniba from school.   Three Bullets 



Sir de pa lowara tega kegda 

Praday watan de paki nishta balakhtona 

O Wayfarer! Rest your head on the stony cobblestone 
It is a foreign land not the city of your kings! 



16 

The Valley of Sorrows 



It all seemed like a bad dream.   

The next day we got a lift to Abbottabad, where my grandmothers family lived.   A small boy was 
brought to sit on their laps to encourage the birth of a son.   On the way a boy on a bicycle crashed into me 
and my left shoulder hurt so much that my eyes watered.   I saw tears in my parents eyes.   We thought speaking in English meant you were more 
intelligent.   There had been an outcry, and the Taliban spokesman Muslim Khan had 
called on the doctor to reopen it.   Son, may you be the star in the sky of knowledge, he used to say.   The brides would wear exquisite clothes and be draped in gold, necklaces 
and bangles given by both sides of the family.   He ended by asking in a thundering voice my grandfather would have 
been proud of, Is Islam such a weak religion that it cannot tolerate a book written against it? Not my 
Islam! 



For the first few years after graduating from Jehanzeb my father worked as an English teacher in a 
wellknown private college.   Right from the first session I think Shiza was surprised how strongwilled and 
vocal we all were.   When you want something all the universe conspires in helping you achieve 
it, it says.   But they heard nothing.  m.   That summer, while he was 
walking in the mountains, our dictator General Zia was killed in a mysterious plane crash, which 
many people said was caused by a bomb hidden in a crate of mangoes.   The year before I was born a group called the Taliban led by a oneeyed mullah had 
taken over the country and was burning girls schools.   

But I said, Education is education.   Dont they want 
them to learn? 

Our headmistress Madam Maryam had studied at Sangota, and her younger sister Ayesha was a 
pupil there, so she and some of the other Sangota girls transferred to our school.   The army was everywhere.   Our family and friends said they had thought it was the end of the world.   It was as if there 
was a feud between two brothers and they agreed to live in different houses.   

Just when it seemed matters could not get worse, the area was hit by flash floods.   

Our school bell rang again for the first time on 1 August.   My Malala, my Malala, my mother wailed and Maryam joined her.   She replied that 
Christ had died on the cross for the sins of Christians and asked what the Prophet Mohammad had 
done for Muslims.   The Taliban were using hotels and 
government buildings as bunkers.   About a week after the battle 
of Swat, forty Taliban leaders from across our province met in South Waziristan to declare war on 
Pakistan.   Dr Farooq was an Islamic scholar and former member of the JamaateIslami party, 



and as one of the biggest voices against Talibanisation he had even issued a fatwa against suicide 
attacks.   
Afterwards I went on as many radio and TV channels as possible.   (The 
average annual income is just $250 half the Pakistani average.   
They saw Fazlullah as a kind of Robin Hood and believed that when Fazlullah took over he would 
give the khans land to the poor.   As soon as she heard I had been shot she called her husband.   There was a major problem, however.   My father thanked him but he was very upset.   It was all your fault, she told me.   

When we got the topic, I couldnt believe my eyes.   When my father went to the police they 
showed him a file on me.   After my father had graduated from 
school he had nothing to do so he volunteered to help his brother.   My fathers friends had arrived with news that was hard to 
believe.   They had only announced their mission to the army chief of staff, 
General Ashfaq Kayani, and President Zardari after the event.   

That same week our maths teacher Miss Shazia arrived at school in a hysterical state.   
Thats why they volunteered their young men.   Because we were cut off from supply routes, what little food was available was 
extremely expensive.   My father said he had heard rumours that some Taliban were even hiding inside the camps 



and harassing the women.   The destruction 
of schools continued.   He tried desperately not to think about the treacherous consonants lying 
ahead of him, just waiting to trip him up and stick in his throat, but when he spoke, the words came 
out fluently like beautiful butterflies taking flight.   

My cousin Reena came into my room They knew you were stealing, she said.   Afterwards Musa Khans body was found nearby.   My father also kept telling them to hide the cameras.   The 
Americans cut off aid.   

My father came home fuming.   General Kayani asked Dr Javid whether I should be sent abroad or not.   What kind of school is this? asked the official, 
laughing at his application.   A doctor she knew told her the bullet had 
passed through my forehead, not my brain, and that I was safe.   But his wife died young 
and was a Parsee, and their only daughter Dina stayed in India and married a Parsee, which didnt sit 
very well in the new Muslim homeland.   I think 
somehow I knew he was there even though my eyes were closed.   I am president of the 
Global Peace Council, the spokesperson of the council of elders, the president of the Swat 
Association of Private Schools, director of my school and head of my family.   Thats what they did in Waziristan when they went after kidnappers and bandits.   When my mother arrived, 
Hidayatullah had to move into the office and sleep on a hard wooden chair.   At least Ill be killed alone.   

We were watching the TV when the news came through.   My father says that in our part of the world this idea of jihad was very much 
encouraged by the CIA.   I loved that book and read 
it over and over again.   I wanted to see pictures of the women in his life.   Our people see conspiracies 
behind everything, and many argued that the attack was actually carried out by Jews as an excuse for 
America to launch a war on the Muslim world.   He had studied in the 
madrasa of Maulana Sufi Mohammad, the founder of the TNSM, and married his daughter.   

My grandmother kept his spirits up he was her favourite and she believed great things lay in store 
for him.   They were friends from the village.   
Once again I stayed up late, memorising the textbook about the history of our independence.   I walked off with two other girls she didnt 
like.   My father wrote a poem, The 
Relics of Butkara, which summed up perfectly how temple and mosque could exist side by side: 
When the voice of truth rises from the minarets,/ The Buddha smiles,/ And the broken chain of 
history reconnects.   First, lets read the book and then why not respond with 
our own book, he suggested.   It seemed very far away.   
My father says that in that moment he could not hold back his tears.   His brother 
Maulana Liaquat, along with three of Liaquats sons, were among those killed in an American drone 
attack on the madrasa in Bajaur at the end of October 2006.   And hed been in Pakistan for more than nine years.   After that the boys stopped coming to our street, but one of 
the small boys who played with Atal would call out suggestively, How is Haroon? whenever I 
passed by.   
We had been left with no choice but to get involved in politics and campaign for education.   We were scared, but our fear was not as strong as our courage.   But finally I had persuaded her to let me grow it to my shoulders.   But though their sacrifice was supposed to have restored government 
control, we were still waiting for the rule of law.   

The girl was played by Moniba, of course, and another classmate Attiya played the part of my 
assistant to add some salt, pepper and masala with her witty asides.   They were so touched by his kindness 
that they shared our story with him.   I played Romeo as a civil servant interviewing people for a job.   My father went to everybody he knew, asking for donations of 
food, clothing and money, and I helped my mother collect blankets.   How will you accept Islam if I put a gun to your head and say Islam is the true religion? 
If they want every person in the world to be Muslim why dont they show themselves to be good 
Muslims first? 

Regularly my father would come home shaken up due to the terrible things he had witnessed and 



heard about such as policemen beheaded, their heads paraded through the town.   This maulana is starting a campaign against 
you, he warned.   
He used to read by the light of the oil lamp in the hujra, and one evening he went to sleep and the oil 
lamp fell over.   

The next few hours were a waitandsee time, the nurses monitoring my heartbeat and vital signs.   Her story was like something out of the novels I had started reading.   If we advertise we wont be able to watch it.   Did you do 
anything against Islam? Did you do anything immoral? No.   We 
have continued with our education.   

I had gone to bed when just before midnight the militants struck.   

There was no one to protect us.   They dont care if the army is actually flying the plane, they are happy to 
stay out of the cockpit and sit in business class, close the curtains and enjoy the fine food and service 
while the rest of us are squashed in economy.   

As we had no relatives in Mardan we were planning to make our way to Shangla, our family 
village.   

All through that spring and summer odd things kept happening.   
They destroyed an entire brigade, one of the worst defeats in the history of the British army.   He took off his turban and put it in my fathers lap.   Atal had a tantrum and refused so he walked home in a huff with some of 
his friends.   
But this was different.   They had examples like, If out 
of 10 Russian infidels, 5 are killed by one Muslim, 5 would be left or 15 bullets 10 bullets = 5 
bullets.   

We also learned that American politicians were furious that bin Laden had been living under our 
noses when all along they had imagined he was hiding in a cave.   She told my father, You dont 
have to come, but I am going and I will take the children to Shangla.   I didnt agree.   You killed people, you slaughtered people, you beheaded 
people, you destroyed schools and still there was no protest in Pakistan.   

I dreamed I wasnt really in hospital.   We stayed in a guesthouse and did 
lots of workshops on how to tell our stories so people outside would know what was going on in our 
valley and help us.   The girl had a big sack and was sorting rubbish into piles, one for cans, one for 
bottle tops, another for glass and another for paper.   The story was that they had then planted the body in Abbottabad and faked 
the raid to embarrass Pakistan.   My father 
told him to go ahead, and Colonel Junaid said he would bring in Dr Mumtaz to help.   We breathed it into our lungs greedily.   Janser Khans hujra was a 
gathering place for people to talk politics, and my father was often there, so they had got to know each 
other.   He felt all these people were just 
waiting for me to die when they had done nothing to protect me.   

We know what happened there.   

In 1949, two years after the creation of Pakistan, he abdicated in favour of his elder son Miangul 
Abdul Haq Jehanzeb.   Suddenly there was a lot of optimism about the future.   Nawaz 
Sharif was so worried about his reaction that he tried to stop the plane from landing in Pakistan.   It was also becoming clear that while they were 
best friends, they found it hard to work as business partners.   cant 
detect US helicopters but gets cable TV just fine, said another.   

My father then signed an in loco parentis document making Dr Fiona my guardian for the trip to 
the UK.   He palpated my spine and located the bullet lying next to my left shoulder blade.   Moniba was devastated and the whole town was in shock.   At that time of day Haji Baba 
Road was always a jumble of coloured rickshaws, people on foot and men on scooters, all zigzagging 
and honking.   I have informed my family and they are very unhappy.   Were not in a position to support a family, he told my father.   An 
army major was assigned to my parents and followed them everywhere.   She 
wanted to buy a new cradle for him when I was born my father couldnt afford one so they used an 
old wooden one from the neighbours which was already third or fourth hand but my father refused.   .   
The riverside hotels and restaurants where tourists used to eat trout and enjoy the views were all 
destroyed.   They had parachuted in 
soldiers and there had been handtohand fighting in the streets.   In Pashto we 
love to sing tapey, twoline poems, and as she scattered the rice she would sing one: Dont kill 
doves in the garden.   

My fathers high school opened in 2003.   Over loudspeakers they called for the girls to surrender.   He was supposed to seal 
the peace deal with a speech calling for reconciliation and an end to violence.   Running a school is not a crime, he told them.   But when half of 
your leaders tell lies and the other half is negotiating with the Taliban, there is nowhere to go.   Neither place is a good place to be.   



My father had had enough.   Five days after I got the award, Aunt Babo, my mothers eldest 
sister, died suddenly.   It was 7.   She was the only girl in a 
class of boys.   I wondered what I would do.   

Some people obviously did not like that.   Malala is now very sick, he told her.   Everything he drew became real.   Our 
people are used to being subservient because under the wali no criticism was tolerated.   Even the woodpeckers.   As the tremors 
continued they had spent the entire day outdoors and then the night too, huddling together for warmth, 
even though it was bitterly cold in the mountains.   

Yes, I was just saying there is a fear in my heart, I replied.   I had a 
window seat and could see the deserts and mountains of our land below me.   They were most likely killed, 
but as there is no proof of death, their wives cant be declared widows.   The women could not get 
information; they didnt know if their husbands and sons were dead or alive.   It was hard to sleep.   Time 
to get up, Jani muri, he would say.   Most of it had gone to the army; ordinary 
people received nothing.   I shivered when he told me such things.   His name was Malak Bakht Baidar.   Who are you? You are crazy! You 
need to go to a doctor.   

I had never written a diary before and didnt know how to begin.   This was perhaps because the military 
had been so attached to the mosque.  30 a.   The army say there is peace, said my father.   

On 12 November Musharraf ordered 10,000 more troops into our valley with additional helicopter 
gunships.   People there said 
Chechens and Uzbeks were among the fighters.   Among them was 
Winston Churchill, who wrote a book about it, and we still call one of the peaks Churchills Picket 
even though he was not very complimentary about our people.   In our country, where the army has seized power so many times, people are often 
wary of the military, particularly those from Swat, where the army had taken so long to act against the 
Taliban.   Going to school, reading and doing our homework 
wasnt just a way of passing time, it was our future.   I was happy to be with my cousin 
Sumbul, who is a year older than me.   
Stop this or you will be in trouble and your children will weep and cry for you It was signed, 
Fedayeen of Islam.   They were little jewels without much 
meaning.   
To motivate students in all provinces he was giving cash awards to girls and boys who scored well in 
their exams.   The only 
targets now are peacebuilders and civilians.   

We were all at home that morning.   First they turned on a tap to wash their hands and discovered there was no water.   My father was angry.   Tennis Balls and the Buddhas of Swat 



First the taliban took our music, then our Buddhas, then our history.   Up there we were higher than the rocky peaks all around us.   Next to 



that was a smaller shed containing a panel with a confusion of wires sprouting from it.   Any time my parents wanted to take the short walk from the hostel to the hospital they 
first had to be cleared via walkietalkie, which took at least half an hour.   Jinnah said, No 
struggle can ever succeed without women participating side by side with men.   The Taliban bulldozed both our Pashtun values and the values of Islam.   She is a very traditional woman and this is our centuriesold culture.   

My mother is very pious and prays five times a day, though not in the mosque as that is only for the 
men.   I 
wanted to write my fathers phone number.   

Bin Laden and his men fled to the White Mountains of Tora Bora in eastern Afghanistan, where he 
had built a network of tunnels while fighting the Russians.   Eucalyptus blossom blew into the house, 
coating everything white, and the wind carried the pungent smell of the rice fields.   We were very unhappy about the armys failure to 
capture the Taliban leadership, and my father and I continued to give lots of interviews.   And schools were expected to treat officials regularly to a good lunch of chicken or trout from 
the river.   

He drew a sketch of his attacker and said the man should be stopped before shooting anyone else.   It was the worst flood in living memory.   They were both away when, ten days later, there 
was a second flood and the building again filled with mud.   Its in the Kana 
dara, which is enclosed by craggy mountain walls and so narrow there is not even room for a cricket 
ground.   But the gunfire kept us awake most nights.   He became a perfect talib.   All these places told our special story.   Finally they said I was 
stable.   

We were all at risk from a Taliban attack.   They glimpsed enough of each other to 
know they liked one another, but for us it is taboo to express such things.   We 
must get her to hospital.   Muslims 
widely considered it blasphemous and it provoked so much outrage that it seemed people were 
talking of little else.   It was a peculiar 
system called wesh under which every five or ten years all the families would swap villages and 
redistribute the land of the new village among the men so that everyone had the chance to work on 
good as well as bad land.   

My fathers friend Hidayatullah had become a government official in Peshawar and warned us, 



This is how these militants work.   We soon saw what he meant.   

A few weeks later the same teacher told him that he could no longer teach girls as the maulana 
doesnt like it.   
While we were there we heard that Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the American envoy to Pakistan 
and Afghanistan, was holding a meeting in the Serena Hotel about the conflict, and my father and I 
managed to get inside.   In colonial times our 
kings owed allegiance to the British but ruled their own land.   They dont accept our 
saints and shrines many Pakistanis are also mystical people and gather at Sufi shrines to dance and 
worship.   

My father was right to think this man was not going to give up mullahs had become more 
powerful figures since Zias rule and campaign of Islamisation.   It didnt 
even have its own building.   
He began speaking against school administrators and congratulating girls by name who left school.   Malala is not just a good speaker but also a 
good writer.   He appealed to all Swatis to return.   But the elders were 
happy with this compromise and they left.   

It was a brave decision by Colonel Junaid, whose superiors were not convinced and were being 
told by other people that I should be sent abroad.   The man chosen to be the leader or caliph was Abu Bakr, a close 
friend and adviser of the Prophet and the man he chose to lead prayers as he lay on his deathbed.   

Some people were happy.   He was a scary man with dark panda shadows around his eyes, large teeth that seemed to 
stand to attention and hair pomaded flat on his head.   There was 
so much damage that it cost my father 90,000 rupees to repair equivalent to the monthly fees for 
ninety students.   I wore more fashionable clothes and didnt cover my 
face even when I became a teenager.   Chairs had been upended and the space 
was a mess.   My father broke the seal on the wooden storage box of maize and filled their 
bowls.   

My father had resisted leaving till the end.   Women had been kept in purdah, schools and bridges had been blown up, businesses had 
closed.   

Go wherever you want, he told my mother and cousin.   One was Sher Zaman, a man who had been in my fathers 
class and always got better grades than him.   He would endlessly 
point out to my father that life on earth was short and that there were few opportunities for young men 
in the village.   

Then another teacher at our school, a maths teacher with long hair, also refused to teach girls.   We know him affectionately as Badshah Sahib, and though he was 
completely illiterate, he managed to bring peace to the valley.   For a while my father did this but stopped 
when he realised that although a falcon flies high it is a cruel bird.   T bought it in the bazaar, she said.   He told us that the last part of the journey had 
been very difficult.   



Some of Jinnahs most famous speeches were displayed.   People 
often call Swat the Switzerland of the East we even had Pakistans first ski resort.   

Giving places to poor children didnt just mean my father lost their fees.   We also have the AhleHadith 
(people of the Hadith), who are Salafists.   They had ended up 
in an argument, and of course just as in our arguments at school there were different versions of who 
said what.   He was made 
general secretary of the Pakhtoon Students Federation (PSF), which wanted equal rights for Pashtuns.   

Everyone in Swat was jubilant, but I felt the happiest because it meant school would reopen 
properly.   He told me she kept a diary 
about their lives all cramped together, about how they spent their days and about her own feelings.   

We too were proud, but his higher profile meant we didnt see him very much.   Even the Queen of England came, and stayed in the White Palace that was built from the 
same marble as the Taj Mahal by our king, the first wali of Swat.   She told my father that Shazia was fine and had begged her, Look after 
Malala! 



We were taken to the helipad by ambulance under high security with motorcycle outriders and 
flashing blue lights.   As he waited outside the headmasters office, he broke out into a 
sweat, and once inside his stutter was worse than ever.   But when they 
came round in October 2012 I felt under pressure.   
Other important people will soon become victims.   The Taliban bombed the power station so we had no 
electricity, then a few days later they blasted the pipeline so we had no gas either.   That maulana has a bad eye 
onus, said my father one day.   We did not 
know then that Musharraf was also letting the Americans use our airfields.   It was a decision that would save my life.   With the Taliban in the valley, our 
government could say to the Americans we cant help you because we have our own problems.   Like all our dictators, he started by addressing the nation 
on TY, beginning, Mere aziz hamwatano  My dear countrymen then went into a long tirade 
against Sharif, saying that under him Pakistan had lost our honour, dignity and respect.   
Teach him, if you can, the wonder of books .   She 
begged my grandmother to start praying immediately.   Then he 
asked if he could talk to me and began asking questions using Irfan as an interpreter.   We heard lots of civilians were being killed.   Ayesha told us how one day on the way 
home from Sangota she had seen a Taliban holding up the severed head of a policeman by its hair, 
blood dripping from the neck.   Zahid Khan was returning to his 
home from a meeting with army officials at Circuit House late at night when he was ambushed.   So everyone spoke with great authority, 
celebrating like the Prophet when he conquered Mecca, though his speech was one of forgiveness not 
cruel victory.   Some of them, his friends and sympathisers, were very upset, 
but he felt that others were jealous of our high profile and believed we had got what was coming to 
us.   Yet he says he was actually lucky.   His legs 
and arms had all been broken.   
He had brought with him a passport for me.   So when Naeem lost his job after a dispute with the college 
administration, they decided to start their own school.   I think there was some problem with hygiene in that muddy place, says my father.   I always knew my mother was a strong woman but I 
looked at her with new respect.   He tried to talk to them but they ran away.   

It was hard to visit that place and read those speeches without thinking that Jinnah would be very 
disappointed in Pakistan.   The Quran teaches us sabar patience but often it feels that we have 
forgotten the word and think Islam means women sitting at home in purdah or wearing burqas while 
men do jihad.   Archaeologists say it was almost as important as 
the Buddhas of Bamiyan, which the Afghan Taliban blew up.   Khushal had his appendix out too.   Even my 
grandfather was proud.   He 
called back with bad news they had been left everywhere, though most shopkeepers had ignored 
them and thrown them away.   At one the 
information minister for our province said Talibanisation was the result of our countrys policy of 
training militants and sending them to Afghanistan, first to fight the Russians, then to fight the 
Americans.   The 
operation took almost five hours.   Three local men, Mukhtar Khan Yousafzai, 
Khurshid Kakajee and Zahid Khan went from /my ra to hujra persuading elders to join together.   The boys would fish using 
earthworms threaded like beads on a string hanging from a long stick.   



I wrote a lot about school as that was at the centre of our lives.   It was a journey of just five minutes 
along the stinky stream, past the giant billboard for Dr Humayuns Hair Transplant Institute where we 
joked that one of our bald male teachers must have gone when he suddenly started to sprout hair.   He didnt tell the Taliban to lay down their arms and 
leave the hujras.   Besides, soon the winter would be here, bringing the snow, which would cleanse and 
quieten everything.   When 
the earthquake happened and our government did little to help, JuD set up relief camps patrolled by 



men with Kalashnikovs and walkietalkies.   She was beautiful and spoke in an 
animated way.   

His own village school had been just a small building.   This time they would clear the town.   But after a while 
the school started to break even and my father began to plan a second school, which he wanted to call 
the Malala Education Academy.   I knew he would not take my demands seriously so 
I didnt push very hard.   It blamed citizens like us for allowing the 
Taliban to control Swat.   

After that it is all a bit hazy.   

In our province Maulana Sufi Mohammad, who had fought in Afghanistan against the Russians, 
issued a fatwa against the US.   
Fazlullah exploited this ignorance.   They wanted to kill two birds with one stone.   They barricaded 
themselves and the madrasa students inside concrete bunkers with sandbags.   

One of their most heated debates in that first year was over a novel.   They offered their private jet, which had its 
own onboard hospital.   Then as evening came it fell in shadow as the sun moved up the Black 
Mountain.   

Benazir had been in exile since I was two years old, but I had heard so much about her from my 
father and was very excited that she would return and we might have a woman leader once more.   When we were eleven and twelve, we did them 
together, but as we turned thirteen or fourteen my friends brothers and fathers didnt allow them 
because they had entered puberty and should observe purdah and also they were afraid.   

My father started teasing Atal, who was eight by then and cheekier than ever.   My father became even more disturbed.   

Whenever he saw me he would greet me with a song as he was still concerned about the sad 
meaning of my name and wanted to lend some happiness to it: L Malala Maiwand wala da.   Pacha and his wife Jajai became his second family.   But we 
knew that was not true.   

The school was founded by my father before I was born, and on the wall above us khushal 
school was painted proudly in red and white letters.   As a teacher he was 
eligible for a discount on his sons school fees for sports and joining the Boy Scouts.   To get him 
released she walked forty miles alone over mountains to appeal to a powerful cousin.   Eid happens twice a year Eid ulFitr or Small Eid marks 
the end of the Ramadan fasting month, and Eid ulAzha or Big Eid commemorates the Prophet 
Abrahams readiness to sacrifice his son Ismail to God.   

The road was heaving with traffic.   As a boy 
in Karachi he would study by the glow of street lights because there was no light at home.   First I thought it 
was a joke.   There was a wall 
of screens in their office.   It was so watery that one girl said, The sky could be 
seen in the soupy curry.   She saw me gossiping with a 
girl in the year above and told me, Now you are with Resham and I am with Rida.   It would be better to plead, OK, 
shoot me, but first listen to me.   But 
we soon found out that the Americans had gone it alone.   Thankfully, our supreme court stopped this.   

My father became suspicious.   You are playing havoc with our lives and our 
culture.   At that time my father was only twelve years old and too young to fight.   When they went in to see him he had two 
televisions on, one tuned to a local channel in Urdu and the other to Sky News in English, with news 
of my shooting.   

After my school closed down I continued to write the blog.   We did not realise then that 9/11 would change our world 
too, and would bring war into our valley.   The militants would enter villages with megaphones and the police would flee.   Then 
she asked my father, Did you know, Ziauddin, that the Taliban have threatened this innocent girl? 
We didnt know what she was talking about so she went on the Internet and showed us that the 
Taliban had that day issued threats against two women Shad Begum, an activist in Dir, and me, 
Malala.   He didnt know why he was speaking to me in English.   

The same one youre using, she replied.   She had hit him so hard 
that when she looked at the shoe it was broken.   Had they done so, he would have been electrocuted.   Then the morning after, 
on TV, we would hear of more Taliban killings and wonder what the army was doing with all its 
booming cannons and why they could not even stop the daily broadcasts on Mullah FM.   It seemed to me that his every wish 
was her command.   

When Colonel Junaid came to check on me, my father again asked him, Will she survive? 

Do you believe in God? the doctor asked him.   On Mullah FM, Fazlullah said she deserved to 
die for her immoral character and any other girls found performing in Banr Bazaar would be killed 
one by one.   He brought logs back from the mountains for firewood, and after 
teaching he would work in the fields where our family had a few buffaloes.   When the sun hit a certain rock, we 
used to say our asr or afternoon prayers.   Safina started it, I protested.   At dusk my father and his friends 
often gathered to sit and drink tea there.   We had no clean water and no 
electricity.   

There were a lot of us not just us five but also my grandmother, my cousin, his wife, Honey, and 
their baby.   Every few years Pakistan sent us a new deputy commissioner, or DC, to govern 
Swat, just as the British had done in colonial days.   But I never listened to my interviews.   
They appeared in groups, armed with knives and Kalashnikovs, and first emerged in Upper Swat, in 
the hilly areas of Matta.   The 
first candidate is a beautiful girl, and he asks her very easy questions such as, How many wheels 
does a bicycle have? When she replies, Two, he says, You are so brilliant The next candidate is 
a man so Romeo asks him impossible things like, Without leaving your chair tell me the make of the 
fan in the room above us.   We believe Allah listens more closely to the 
whitehaired.   

It was not easy to get from Besham to our village and we had to walk twentyfive kilometres 
carrying all our things.   In Pakistan we have something called the 
Blasphemy Law, which protects the Holy Quran from desecration.  m when they 
saw me for the last time in Pakistan.   Instead they advanced to the east and on 16 November 
captured Alpuri, the main town of Shangla.   The new girls had horrible stories.   Pakistan doesnt have student loans and he had never even set foot in a bank.   At least I didnt have to wear one.   He went there by bus, and it seemed so big 
to him compared to his home village that he thought hed arrived in a city.   

My father shares everything with my mother and there was no way he would keep such a thing 
secret.   I noticed she had tears in her eyes.   

After what happened with Safina, I vowed that I would never treat a friend badly again.   We stayed there for a week and to my joy I 



heard Moniba was also in Abbottabad, as was one of our teachers and another friend.   People had lived by the river in Swat for 3,000 
years and always seen it as our lifeline, not a threat, and our valley as a haven from the outside world.   Our home 
was near Circuit House, the army headquarters, so we were worried it might have been destroyed in 
the shelling.   

My father was scared and my uncle kept saying, Be very careful some of these people might be 
secret agents.   He was the guarantor that 
the Taliban would lay down their arms and there would be peace in the valley.   The news showed shocking pictures of the wreckage, everywhere blood and 
broken glass, and dead bodies.   


Growing up in a School 



My mother started school when she was six and stopped the same term She was unusual in the 
village as she had a father and brothers who encouraged her to go to school.   The news at first was muddled and she initially believed Id been in an accident and had 
injured my foot.   We will all follow in a few 
days when the documents are sorted out.   

With so few students, they had little money to equip the school and soon ran out of credit.   

That is wrong! said the maulana.   There is a third power stronger than both, that 
of women But General Zia brought in Islamic laws which reduced a womans evidence in court to 
count for only half that of a mans.   
Now listen to the sound of your lockets and bangles.   It was wonderful to hear that sound and run 
through the doorway and up the steps as we used to.   If the Taliban find out youre giving water in the month 
of Ramadan they will bomb us ! 

My father replied that people would die either of thirst or bombings.   Were she to 



break that tradition, men and women would talk against her, particularly those in our own family.   The 
teachers had already been evacuated as they had received threats earlier.   

So I studied hard too.   Their first child, born in 1995, was a girl and 
stillborn.   This is my number, call me.   The Muttahida Majlis eAmal (MMA) alliance was 
a group of five religious parties including the Jamiat UlemaeIslam (JUI), which ran the madrasas 
where the Taliban were trained.   

When I was born we were very poor.   

By the start of January 2009 there were only ten girls in my class when once there had been twenty 
seven.   

I wanted to cry because I felt in my heart I might never see my home again.   

At breakfast I suggested to my brothers that we should talk of peace now and not of war.   The ISI chief 
asked the Americans to hold off their attack on Afghanistan until he had gone to Kandahar to ask the 
Taliban leader Mullah Omar to hand over bin Laden; instead he offered the Taliban help.   

That morning had begun like any other, though a little later than usual.   On Pakistans fiftieth anniversary on 14 August 1997 there were parades and 
commemorations throughout the country.   We had a new 
government under President Asif Zardari, the widower of Benazir, but they didnt seem to care about 
Swat.   Others said that the flogging had taken place in 
January, before the peace deal, and had been released now to sabotage it.   

There was also Nooria, whose mother Kharoo did some of our washing and cleaning, and Alishpa, 
one of the daughters of Khalida, the woman who helped my mother with the cooking.   What kind of mullah is he? Hes driving us crazy.   The competition was always between me and my best friend Moniba, 
who had beautiful writing and presentation, which the examiners liked, but I knew I could beat her on 
content.   They had no power, as all their makeshift 
hydroelectric projects had been smashed to pieces.   

My cousins made fun of me for my city ways.   So British India was 
divided in August 1947, and an independent Muslim state was born.   To try and boost 
their income they ran a tuck shop at school, going off in the mornings and buying snacks to sell to the 
children.   Now we will have the courage to speak.   Eighty people were killed including boys 
as young as twelve, some of whom had come from Swat.   To this day I still havent got to try duck pancakes! 

Islamabad was totally different to Swat.   The first words I spelt out were father and country.   

I am only human, and when I heard the guns my heart used to beat very fast.   The fruit of our apricot tree might be eaten by someone else 
this year.   Leave me, for Gods sake! I am a woman, a Muslim.   For as long as my father could remember it had been 
his dream to open a school, but with no family contacts or money it was extremely hard for him to 
realise this dream He thought there was nothing more important than knowledge.   I didnt enjoy shopping, unlike my mother, who liked beautiful clothes even though 
we didnt have much money.   Its a big question for the army and administration.   Besides, my father knew this 
could be our megaphone to the outside world.   Even though my father 
was not an elder or a khan, he was chosen as spokesperson as he was not afraid to speak out.   Around 600 chiefs were massacred.   Only 
two escaped, and they fled to Peshawar along with their tribesmen.   They would stop us but seemed unaware of each others 
presence.   We used the Pakistani rupee, but the government of Pakistan could only intervene on 
foreign policy.   My father was in the school waiting and 



when he heard the news he came running.   It was too narrow even for a cricket pitch and only 
one family had a television.   Are you my friend or Ridas? I asked Moniba.   First I thought of wearing a very 
beautiful dress, but then I decided to wear something more modest for the interview as I wanted 
people to focus on my message and not my clothes.   Prime Minister 
Yusuf Raza Gilani called for an inquiry and made a statement saying the flogging of the girl was 
against the teachings of Islam.   They had no clean water as the river was brown 
with wreckage and debris.   He also spoke Persian and Arabic and cared 
deeply for words.   Anyone reading them might think we won the three wars we have fought 
and lost against our great enemy India.   The only television was in the hujra of one of 
the wealthier families, and no one had a computer.   In the winter everything was white snow, long icicles hanging from the roof like daggers, 
which we loved to snap off.   Drip, drip, drip.   In Pakistan we dont have a culture of honouring people while they 
are alive, only the dead, so he thought it was a bad omen.   We held an election for speaker and I won! It was strange to stand up there 
on the stage and have people address me as Madam Speaker, but it felt good to have our voices heard.   During Ramadan no food or 
drink can pass a Muslims lips in daylight hours.   My 
grandfather suggested that he might take my father in so he could go to college there.   I felt so sad.   The 
following day a suicide bomber attacked another army truck in Swat, killing seventeen soldiers and 
thirteen civilians.   I did not know how to stop.   It was a girl about my age.   Lets wait and see, he said.   
Muslim Khan, the Taliban spokesman, was on the phone.   One theory was that the devastation had been 
created by the Americans using something called HAARP (High Frequency Active Auroral Research 
Program) technology, which causes huge waves under the ocean, thus flooding our land.   My father said we common people were like chaff caught 
between the two stones of a water mill.   The words came out wrong.   I didnt mind; I just 
wanted to be friends.   The night before the exams began I stayed up studying until three oclock in the morning and 
reread an entire textbook.   If shes on her own with two boys 
in Mingora, anything could happen to them! 

My father called the colonel.   

That night my father spoke on Geo TV and told Kamran Khan that people had had high hopes but 
were disappointed.   This showed that my brain was swelling dangerously.   



15 

Leaving the Valley 



Leaving the valley was harder than anything I had done before.   This was a bit different when we wrote about subjects close to our hearts these 
were topics like extremism and the Taliban rather than clothes and hairstyles.   And we were learning how powerful we are when we speak.   Our people dont know their exact dates of birth my mother, 
for example, does not know when she was born.   Fazlullah could now carry out his threats and mobilise support 
for his Taliban in the name of Lai Masjid.   I took out my books one by one and just stared at them Maths, physics, Urdu, English, 
Pashto, chemistry, biology, Islamiyat, Pakistan studies.   His advice was 
to appeal to God and that He would answer our prayers.   Hed 
boast, Ziauddin is a shaheen  a falcon because this is a creature that flies high above other birds.   People were bitterly disappointed and started abusing him What did that devil say? 
people asked.   

Though we had no generator at home, my father bought one to install at the school, and fresh water 
was pumped from a borehole, which all the children in the neighbourhood went to collect.   
Then Safmas father put his foot on the pedal and away we drove out of the small world of our street, 
home and school and into the unknown.   They took money from the people who chopped down our precious trees for timber and then 
demanded more money to let their trucks pass.   Like my father he was very outspoken and had been threatened 
too.   Dont kill 
me! Then shots rang out and her bulletridden body was dragged to Green Chowk.   
They occupied all government and private buildings which they thought were of strategic importance.   My fathers cousin Jehan Sher Khan 
Yousafzai was one of the few who came to celebrate my birth and even gave a handsome gift of 
money.   One black day they even dynamited 
the face of the Jehanabad Buddha, which was carved into a hillside just half an hours drive from 
Mingora and towered twentythree feet into the sky.   Now their 
helicopters flew in pairs overhead like big black buzzing insects, and when we walked home we 
stayed close to the walls so they wouldnt see us.   He said 
men should keep their beards but give up smoking and using the tobacco they liked to chew.   Our men think earning money and ordering around others is where power lies.   My 
father always answered the door as women must stay inside.   At the top of the steps was an open courtyard with doors to all the 
classrooms.   But the image of America in Pakistan had become of one of drones, secret 
raids on our territory and Raymond Davis.   My father 
also called her and told her to prepare for the worst.   


I woke up on 16 October, a week after the shooting.   I have no militants and no FM radio, he 
joked.   She began praying with the Holy Quran in her hand, standing facing the wall, 
reciting verses over and over for hours.   First the earthquake, then 
the Taliban, then the military operation and now, just as we were starting to rebuild, devastating 
floods arrived to wash all our work away.   I was in my cousins car, and as we drove 
through a river where the road had been washed away we had to stop at a Taliban checkpoint.   It was always a race between us and the birds to get to them.   If anything the Taliban became even more barbaric.   The road left the river and wound 
up through narrow passes over steep firclad heights, higher and higher, until our ears popped.   One of the fruit pickers reported her to the local imam, who informed the police.   She was bad, and it was right that she was killed.   She lived in Banr Bazaar, a narrow 
street in our town of Mingora which is famous for its dancers and musicians.   It is a Hadith of the Holy Prophet 
that if you see something bad or evil you should stop it with your own hand.   

My mother was in a state of shock and could not understand why the doctors were not operating to 
remove the bullet.   He promised 
he would make his own assets and tax return public.  m curfew and people heard her screaming, T promise Ill stop! I 
promise I wont sing and dance again.   

I just want to know if my husband is dead or not, pleaded one lady I met.   
This was the war I was going to fight.   The new partners 
again went from door to door, telling people they had started a new kind of school.   I was on the way to meet him with my parents when 
we were approached by a short man who was frantically talking on two different phones.   In the morning 
the sun reflected off the top of Tor Ghar; when we got up for the fajr prayers, the first of our five 
daily prayers, we would look left and see the golden peak of Spin Ghar lit with the first rays of the 
sun like a white lady wearing a jumar tika a gold chain on her forehead.   One of them was her neighbour, 
who was angry because she said Asia Bibis goat had damaged her water trough.   My relatives would ask me, Would you like to cook chicken for us? and Id 
say, No, the chicken is innocent.   We drank green tea as we could not afford milk for regular tea.   Dont go 
that way, he urged.   Usually I liked exams as a chance to show what I could do.   

He tried to explain that those children were breadwinners so if they went to school, even for free, 
the whole family would go hungry.   Many students argued that the book 
should be banned and burned and the fatwa upheld.   But his wife and younger brother stayed inside, along with many 
students, and there were daily exchanges of gunfire between the militants and the troops outside.   Soon our prisons were full of cases like that of a thirteenyearold 
girl who was raped and become pregnant and was then sent to prison for adultery because she 
couldnt produce four male witnesses to prove it was a crime.   

I didnt write anything about it in my diary.   That 
wasnt easy with a camera trained on me everywhere I went even as I brushed my teeth.   Meanwhile time was ticking away.   My father came from a backward village yet through education 
and force of personality he made a good living for us and a name for himself.   In their bubble inside the hospital they did not realise that my story had travelled all round the 
world and that people were calling for me to be sent abroad for treatment.   My mother said it was hard for the 
poor children to learn when they were not getting enough food at home so some of the girls would 
come to our house for breakfast.   Her husband was a policeman in 
the small town of Matta, and Fazlullah s men had stormed in and some police officers had been 
killed, including her husband.   I noticed wherever he went he would 
look up and down the street four or five times.   One girl even printed it out and brought it in to 
show my father.   So Hai Kakar would call me in 
the evening on my mothers mobile.   My father and brothers were standing outside when a group of 
teenage Taliban went past playing victory songs on their mobiles.   His family became embroiled in a dispute with their cousins over 
a small plot of forest.   A khans daughter cant marry a barbers son and a 
barbers daughter cant marry a khans son.   On the road we 
passed dusty faced children bent double with huge bundles of grass on their backs and men leading 



flocks of shaggy goats that wandered hither and thither.   My father often spoke of the kindness of Akbar Khan and Nasir Pacha to illustrate 
that if you help someone in need you might also receive unexpected aid.   Just as it is our right to sing.   Instead he built forts on mountains all 
across Swat and created an army.   None of the 
older women had any education but they all told stories and recited what we call tapey, Pashto 
couplets.   Sometimes though she would be out because 
she was shopping for clothes in the Cheena Bazaar, and that would be a different matter.   People liked this as justice was 
speedy, unlike in Pakistani courts, where you could wait years and have to pay bribes to be heard.   We heard there were thousands of missing all over Pakistan.   Girls like me who still went to school he 
called buffaloes and sheep.   While some papers described me as a peace icon, others carried the usual conspiracy 
theories, some bloggers even questioning if I had really been shot.   Many children had to have their classes in tents because 
the Taliban had destroyed their schools.   Look at my dark skin and look at yours ! 

We visited the White Palace and saw where the Queen had slept and the gardens of beautiful 
flowers.   

The diary of Gul Makai received attention further afield.   Every night my father would pray to God, O Allah, please make war 
between Muslims and infidels so I can die in your service and be a martyr.   During the night American special forces called Navy Seals had carried out a raid in 
Abbottabad, one of the places wed stayed as IDPs, and had found and killed Osama bin Laden.   There was little to do.   Our favourite game was weddings.   The 
worst moment for her was when someone came to the house with my front door keys, which had been 
found at the scene of the shooting.   Our people traditionally fire rifles in celebration of births and weddings but 
even that had stopped during the conflict.   Before we had even started, 



intelligence agents came and asked, What are you doing? Who brought these outfits? 

On 12 July I turned fourteen, which in Islam means you are an adult.   
Occasionally I made a low grunt and moved my hand or fluttered my eyes.   I am confused, 
Aba, I told my father.   

Hes actually a highschool dropout whose real name isnt even Fazlullah, my father retorted, but 
they wouldnt listen.   They take out loans from state banks but they dont pay them back.   The Taliban said girls could go to school after the peace agreement but they should be 
veiled and covered.   

And me, her beauty, he laughs.   The 
Afghans were so proud that the last Afghan king built a Maiwand victory monument in the centre of 
Kabul.   We werent going to stay in the camps because it was the worst idea ever.   Then I 
would check all the rooms, one by one.   She loved him so much that she would slip him extra meat and the cream off the milk while 
she went without.   We had only gone a short way when a policeman stopped the van and started asking 
questions, wasting precious time.   Let them be illiterate.   My father and his friends were disgusted.   Our own museum in Swat had 
closed.   We have lost so many of the precious lives of our soldiers and this is due to 
your negligence.   Police fired into the 
crowd, and five people were killed.   Liberal 
progressives like him did not enjoy the singing and chanting.   Our army, which already had a lot of strange side businesses, like factories making 
cornflakes and fertilisers, had started producing soap operas.   Malala is a genius girl, my class fellows would say.   They can stop us going to school 
but they cant stop us learning, I said.   The Americans were worried that their ally 
General Musharraf was too unpopular in Pakistan to be effective against the Taliban so they had 
helped broker an unlikely powersharing deal.   Most 
Pashtun men never do this, as sharing problems with women is seen as weak.   .   

There was worse in store when my father went to register the school.   
I loved the gloopy honey, which we ate with walnuts.   

The first paper, on Monday, 8 October, was physics.   A peace deal had been struck between the Taliban and the 
provincial government, which was now under the control of the ANP, not the mullahs.   Then he took some 
gur, dark molasses made from sugar cane, and rolled it around his mouth to moisten it with spit.   Even the Pakistan media, which has been so soft on you till now, is 
outraged.   Her eyes would not meet mine.   Who will reconstruct all these buildings and schools? she 
wanted to know.   All the children gathered around our teachers as chicks swarm to 
a mother hen.   Dr Javid suggested 
Great Ormond Street in London, and specialist hospitals in Edinburgh and Glasgow.   First a brother on one side would attack an uncle on the other.   We Pashtuns cannot turn away relatives or friends, however inconvenient.   Even for the adults it was 
hard to imagine the biggest buildings in Swat are the hospital and a hotel, which are two or three 
storeys.   I was lying on Monibas lap, bleeding from my head 
and left ear.   I knew these 
were very small steps.   My grandfather and uncle used to drive my father mad, 
teasing him, Youre not as good as Sher Zaman, so much he once wished that rocks would come 
down the mountain and flatten him.   

It took them two goes to destroy it.   If anyone 
offended him, their entire family could be expelled from Swat.   Both things are false! replied my father.   The party had been close to General Zia and done 
badly in the elections.   My father does not respond well to being pushed and remained firm even though it was 
clear that by now he was creating havoc.   Back then, they said, the mountains were all still covered in trees, there were 
schools every five kilometres and the wali sahib would visit them in person to resolve problems.   I wasnt the only one to be interviewed.   The teachers told us 
examiners first looked at how much we had written, then presentation.   Swat became part of Pakistan 
in 1969, the year my father was born.   Hill station resorts like Malam Jabba, 
Madyan and Bahrain were devastated, their hotels and bazaars in ruins.   They became known as Shias, shortened from ShiatAli, the 
Party of Ali.   In our house my mother managed everything because my father was so busy.   
Sometimes a plywood coffin would be brought back from one of the mines.   Because of the curfew and the checkpoints there was not one other 
vehicle on the road that didnt belong to the military.   When Sufi 
Mohammad was imprisoned in a roundup of militant leaders in 2002, Fazlullah had taken over the 
movements leadership.   Finally I would be able to return to school 
without fear.   Someone who is 
against America, against the Pakistan establishment, against English law, he has been infected by the 
Taliban.   I could not speak, my eyes were shut and it was only my breath 
that reassured them I was still alive.   We 



can pray to God.   It was Honesty is the best policy.   Usman Bhai Jan, our driver, made us laugh 
as usual.   She took the pink phone that Aba bought me.   I found it particularly hard in the 
afternoon, when I didnt want to be dragged away from the TV At exam time I prayed to Allah for 
high marks though our teachers used to warn us, God wont give you marks if you dont work hard.   One of his friends went instead.   
Some girls were singing, I was drumming rhythms with my fingers on the seat.   One of them was to a boy whose father, Sharafat Ali, had helped my father when he was a 
penniless college student.   Policemen 
were so scared of being killed that they took out adverts in the newspapers to announce they had left 



the force.   

To try to get people at home to support him, General Zia launched a campaign of Islamisation to 
make us a proper Muslim country with the army as the defenders of our countrys ideological as well 
as geographical frontiers.   What really depressed him was the looting of the destroyed schools the furniture, the 
books, the computers were all stolen by local people.   There is a suicide bomber over there! Wed promised to meet the peace 
walker, so we went by a different route, placed a garland round his neck, then left quickly for home.   She really wanted to please her parents, particularly her mother.   

My first diary entry appeared on 3 January 2009 under the heading I am afraid : I had a terrible 
dream last night filled with military helicopters and Taliban.   But every day she would leave behind her girl cousins playing at home and she envied them 
There seemed no point in going to school just to end up cooking, cleaning and bringing up children, so 
one day she sold her books for nine annas, spent the money on boiled sweets and never went back.   There was usually a note pinned to them saying something like, This is 
what happens to an army agent, or Do not touch this body until 11 a.   I could see why, when our 
people go to Karachi to work, they always want to be buried in the cool of our valley.   My room was at the front with lots of windows and I kept the 
curtains open.   Another little girl cried, saying she wanted to ride there too.   My mother took me to say sorry to Safina and 
her parents.   Dr Javid, who is an emergency care consultant at 
Queen Elizabeth Hospital, agreed, but asked to take Dr Fiona as she is from Birmingham Childrens 
Hospital and a specialist in childrens intensive care.   My mother and father sat outside the operating theatre.   And now I had.   When he left the room Maryam switched it back 
on.   The bus dropped me at 
the steps leading up to our street.   

We Pashtuns are split between Pakistan and Afghanistan and dont really recognise the border that 
the British drew more than 100 years ago.   We dont 
want her to become shaheed millat [a martyr of the nation] like Liaquat Ali Khan.   

What is she saying? asked my aunt as if I were talking about something impossible.   He said we should continue to 
speak out.   

It was late in the evening of 3 August when my father received an alarming phone call from a Geo 
TV correspondent called Mehboob.   
Around three and a half million people had lost their homes.   I close my eyes 
and for a moment I am back in my valley the high snowtopped mountains, green waving fields 
and fresh blue rivers and my heart smiles when it looks at the people of Swat.   Some even agreed with her killing, out of fear of the Taliban or because they were in favour 
of them.   He himself had been a political prisoner as well as a close ally of Benazir.   

It was in Spal Bandi that my father came across women who had great freedom and were not 
hidden away as in his own village.   

Yes, said my father.   Our friend Shiza and some of the activists we had met in Islamabad came to 
Mingora and distributed lots of money.   Zahid Khan 
was bleeding so much it was as if his white beard was bathed in red.   

Finally we made it up onto Sky Turn, the gateway to Shangla Top, a mountain pass which feels as if 
its on top of the world.   He described Pakistans courts as unIslamic and said, I 
consider Western democracy a system imposed on us by the infidels.   I read that Benazir Bhutto insisted on wearing glass 
bangles at her wedding to set an example but the tradition of adorning the bride still continued.   It was very hard.   But then he started up again.   

Are you scared now? I asked my father.   The monthly school 
fees were never enough to cover all our outgoings so the extra fees were welcome, but my father was 
unhappy.   The brothers 
were famed for their fiery sermons and attracted thousands of worshippers, particularly after 9/11.   Fazlullah was made 
chief of the Swat sector.  m or you will be next On 
some of the nights of the killings there would also be earthquakes, which made people even more 
scared as we connect every natural disaster with a human disaster.   One night there was a small explosion in their village 
and the wife cried.   The nurses 
.   I went with him.   How did they get there? If you have so much information, why cant 
you catch them? 

His reply went on for about ten to fifteen minutes and I couldnt work out what his answer was! 
Then I asked about reconstruction.   We went on our first ever visit to the theatre to see an English play called Tom, Dick and 
Harry and had art classes.   After this the road winds back down for a while then follows the 
Ghwurban River and peters out into a rocky track.   

It was nightfall by the time we reached Besham as many roads were blocked.   He and my 
father had studied for their bachelors and masters degrees in English together and were both 
passionate about education.   It is huge and white and looks like a shimmering tent suspended between 
minarets.   

In my dreams about the shooting my father is also in the bus and he is shot with me, and then there 
are men everywhere and I am searching for my father.   Everyone was excited because they hoped Sufi Mohammad would 
proclaim peace and victory and ask the Taliban to lay down their arms.   The crowds were so large that the bus moved at a walking pace.   Teachers helped us beforehand on how to respond to 
questions.   One of our neighbours told us he 
had even seen them leaving the bodies of dead Taliban in the streets for all to see.   They were mostly boys 
although eleven girls from my school went along.   

A couple of weeks after that our school was asked to take part in the District Child Assembly 
Swat, which had been set up by the charity UNICEF and by the Khpal Kor (My Home) Foundation for 
orphans.   He had spoken at an event to commemorate the 
third anniversary of the bombing of the Haji Baba High School.   On the way back home I noticed that he was in tears.   

Then on 1 December 2009 there was a suicide attack on a wellknown local ANP politician and 
member of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa assembly, Dr Shamsher Ali Khan.   You already have lots of problems and we are doing lots for you, he replied.   Although my condition had been stabilised 
it was felt that I needed to be moved within fortyeight hours, seventytwo at the most.   Until I was eight or nine my mother used to cut my hair short 
like my brothers because of lice and also to make it easier to wash and brush as it would get messed 
up under my shawl.   Education is our right, I said.   We would sit on the 
floor around a long plastic sheet which my mother laid with food, and eat with our right hand as is our 
custom, balling together rice and meat.   We decided to spend the rest of the money on people who 
needed help.   

He suggested sending me to boarding school in Abbottabad like Khushal, but I didnt want to go.   They were forcing men to grow beards as long 
as a lantern and women to wear burqas.   I will be prime minister and 
she will be my secretary.   My 
father fired him, but some other teachers were worried and sent a delegation to his office.   I made a speech about the importance 
of education and also talked about Benazir Bhutto as this was her city.   

It felt as though the whole country was going mad.   The Pakistan army had far more men and heavy weapons so they 
quickly managed to recapture the valley.   Sindhis often talk of separation and in Baluchistan there is an ongoing 
war which gets talked about very little because it is so remote.   Local people had no idea what it was back then we did not know that the 
Americans could do such a thing.   
Our classes were still mixed at that age, and all the boys and girls yelled, Earthquake! We ran 
outside as we had been taught to do.   Shazia had been hit twice, in the left collarbone and palm, and had been 
brought to the hospital with me.   One day my mother went shopping with my cousin as 
she was getting married and wanted to buy things for her wedding.   They wouldnt put drops in if there was no 
chance.   When we went on school 
trips to visit the mountains, I knew she couldnt afford them so I would pay for her with my pocket 
money.   

Down below, my mother was watching from the roof of our house.   When he came back and found out 
she had given away her gold he was furious.   We raced around, building snowmen and snow bears and trying to catch 



snowflakes.   My mother enjoyed these stories, but my father was horrified.   I could not sleep until he returned and I could lock the gate.   Moniba often brought 
food to school and would just bring one spare fork.   Hidayatullah laughed.   

Its like when one mixes milk with tea, I said.   Soon everyone seemed to be talking about the radio station.   She had never seen the sea before.   Many never came back.   Some men refused to fight, not wishing to battle their own people.   It was unbelievable.   The nurses werent telling me 
anything.   The tourist areas were the hardest hit parts of Swat.   When Moniba spoke she couldnt control her tears.   

The first school to be blown up was Shawar Zangay, a government girls primary school in Matta.   There was really only one subject 9/11.   Little did we know that years later the same maulana s organisation would become the 
Swat Taliban.   After some time they went to visit 
some tribes in Swat to win their support so they could return to Afghanistan.   I was in Year 5 and some of us pretended we were younger than we were.   In a short 
time they had taken over fiftynine villages and set up their own parallel administrations.   She was 
just sixteen, one year older than me.   No visitors could get in even when the Prime 
Minister came to see me he was not allowed inside.   
They hung him and then they shot his father.   Soon they had 
taken over many villages.   My father said 
people had been seduced by Fazlullah.   

Then there were more attacks.   

It took over half an hour to walk to school, and because I am bad at getting up in the morning the 



second day we were late.  

Swat lies on a geological fault line and we often had earthquakes, but this felt different.   

A few days later I saw Safina playing with a phone exactly the same as mine.   The Swat museum moved its 
collection away for safekeeing.   After the operation, first we will have recovery, then 
rehabilitation, then hold and transfer to civil authorities.   This involved the army bribing them to halt all attacks 
and keep out foreign fighters.   We all had breakfast together me, my mother, my father, Khushal and Atal.   

No one could understand how this had happened.   At first we thought we were safe 
in Mingora, the biggest town in Swat.   You take one or two minutes to utter just one sentence.   Then 9/11 had made this militancy more mainstream.   

Next Fazlullah began holding a shura, a kind of local court.   

Some of our teachers stopped coming to school.   

Our people say it is a good system, and our crime rate is much lower than in nonPashtun areas.   My father kept trying to persuade Naeem s friends and family to stay so 
he could be fined too! 

After three months Naeem had had enough.   I didnt mind not going to the 
Cheena Bazaar.   Islam does not allow democracy 
or elections.   I was only eleven years old but I 
felt as though I had lost everything.   It 
was very sad as in the end the family was betrayed and arrested and Anne died in a concentration 
camp when she was only fifteen.   
General Musharraf was in exile in London.   I drummed my fingers.   One school gave its 
teachers salaries for a month, but most didnt know what to do as they couldnt afford to pay.   The local commander, General 



Iftikhar, stormed the control tower at Karachi so that Musharraf s plane could land.   

For as long as I can remember my mother has talked to birds.   

When they got to the hospital the colonel told my father that if I was to be allowed to fly to the UK 
then there were other documents that needed to be signed.   The same will happen to 
us, mark my words, and we will have no shelter, no place to migrate to.   People visited him to 
pay homage and kiss his hand because they were tired of war and suicide bombings.   It 
was almost as if they thought Fazlullah would recreate our old princely state from the time of the 
wali.   My father was always talking on his 
mobile so I loved to copy him and pretend to make calls on mine.   My grandmother started 
crying and saying her life had never been so bad.   

This is typical, he said.   He made bargains with God.   We went with my fathers friend Fazal Maula and his 
daughter.   Shortly 
after that we were told a man who had completed a peace walk from Dera Ismail Khan was coming 
through Mingora and we wanted to welcome him.   But fear is very powerful 
and in the end it was this fear that had made people turn against Shabana.   It seemed to me that before Pakistan there was endless fighting between Hindus and Muslims.   
Their home was in Spal Bandi, a beautiful mountain village on the way to the White Palace, and my 
father describes it as a romantic and inspirational place.   Two of his children were even born in the 
Abbottabad hospital.   

About a week later the army came to Swat, making lots of noise with their jeeps and helicopters.   I am only one small man 


The Autumn of the Earthquake 



One fine October day when I was still in primary school our desks started to tremble and shake.   Within a few hours of the attack, an 
influential local cleric called Faqir Mohammad, who had run the madrasa, announced that the deaths 
would be avenged by suicide bombings against Pakistani soldiers.   Are you sure this is the only reason you are not 
coming? he asked.   It was a long slow journey and we were all very sweaty 
crammed in together.   They escaped through these and over the 
mountains into Kurram, another tribal agency.   Were not going to operate at this stage.   My father was horrified, thinking this meant I had internal 
bleeding.   My father laughed and said I should go into politics.   My feeling was that nobody can stop death; it doesnt matter if it comes from a 
talib or cancer.   Amazingly three 
quarters of all the IDPs were put up by the people of Mar dan and the nearby town of Swabi.   
The police found his legs and other parts of his body.   We normally dont have monsoons in Swat and at first we were happy, thinking 
the rain would mean a good harvest.   They looked so dark and dirty that my fathers 
friend described them as people deprived of baths and barbers.   
Malala swung in that cradle, he said.   We arranged to meet in a park, 
and I brought her Pepsi and biscuits.   The man was astonished and 



apologised for having tormented him.   They muttered about hidden hands and unseen forces.   There wasnt time to fetch my mother so 
Maryam insisted she would go too as I might need a womans help.   But I was 
used to speaking in public so I came out and in front of all the boys I recited one naat, a poem in 
which I praised the Prophet.   Even 
some of the dancers of Banr Bazaar had moved back, although they were mostly making DVDs to sell, 



rather than performing live.   

The only practice wed had was reading out poems at morning assembly, but there was an older 
girl at school called Fatima who was a very good speaker.   

One day we got a call from America, from a student at Stanford University.   At the event my father had spoken 
passionately.   My brothers loved this, and they would taunt me and my mother by pointing out the 
wreckage of vehicles on the mountainside.   

We heard about Shabanas death the next morning.   My father wanted us to be inspired by our 
great hero, but in a manner fit for our times with pens, not swords.   My father didnt care.   

Yet my father remained hopeful and believed there would be a day when there was an end to the 
destruction.   And if it was serious why werent they operating? He felt uncomfortable in a 
military hospital.   Everyone wanted to see the back of the corrupt government officials sent into the valley.