 There lay great Cthulhu and his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults and sending out at last, after cycles incalculable, the thoughts that spread fear to the dreams of the sensitive and called im- periously to the faithful to come on a pilgrimage of liberation and restoration.  Parker slipped as the other three were plunging frenziedly over end- less vistas of green-crusted rock to the boat, and Johansen swears he was swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldn't have been there; an angle which was acute, but be- haved as if it were obtuse. 
It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came, and I know that panic would have broken loose had they been able to compare notes.  They included not only a repetition of what he had formerly dreamed, but touched wildly on a gigantic thing "miles high" which walked or lumbered about.  Being ordered peremptorily to turn back, Capt.  Briden looked back and went mad, laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at intervals till death found him one night in the cabin whilst Jo- hansen was wandering deliriously.  Sailing for London, I reembarked at once for the Norwegian capital; and one autumn day landed at the trim wharves in the shadow of the Egeberg. 
In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of per- haps an acre's extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry.  It had escaped even the cutting bureau which had at the time of its issuance been avidly col- lecting material for my uncle's research. "
It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upon a sleeping memory and won the fevered interest

of my uncle. 
Above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evident pictorial intent, though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea of its nature.  I have looked upon all that the uni- verse has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me.  For five minutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description.  The rest fol- lowed him, and looked curiously at the immense carved door with the now familiar squid-dragon bas-relief.  A sad-faced woman in black answered my summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she told me in halting English that Gustaf Johansen was no more.  The tips of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the centre, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled-up, crouching hind legs gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of the way down toward the bottom of the pedestal.  Upon retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean cities of Titan blocks and sky-flung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister with latent horror.  Behind the figure was a vague suggestions of a Cyclopean architectural background.  Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for the soapy, greenish-black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations re- sembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy.  When I think of the extent of all that may be brooding down there I almost wish to kill my- self forthwith.  every trace of Wilcox's malady suddenly ceased. 

The Madness from the Sea
If heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effa- cing of the results of a mere chance which fixed my eye on a certain stray piece of shelf-paper.  They have hinted at strange survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if not masked by a bland optimism.  The cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers brushed the backs of huge fore paws which clasped the croucher's elevated knees.  Those Old Ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first men, who formed a cult which had never died. 
The Vigilant left Valparaiso March 25th, and on April 2nd was driven considerably south of her course by exceptionally heavy storms and monster waves.  His temperature, oddly enough, was not greatly above normal; but the whole condition was otherwise such as to suggest true fever rather than mental disorder.  The present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe of this abhorred area, but that location was bad enough; hence perhaps the very place of the worship had terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds and incidents.  The image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed and carried back by Legrasse. 
Something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything more definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen.  I know too much, and the cult still lives. 
The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the entire meeting, was a commonplace-looking middle-aged man who had traveled all the way from New Or- leans for certain special information unobtainable from any loc- al source.  I saw the Alert, now sold and in commercial use, at Circular Quay in Sydney Cove, but gained nothing from its non-committal bulk.  If I say that my somewhat extra- vagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures of an oc- topus, a dragon, and a human caricature, I shall not be unfaith- ful to the spirit of the thing.  He could not tell - they would think him mad.  The carven idol was great Cthulhu, but none might say whether or not the others were precisely like him. 
Theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein our world and human race form transient incidents.  It is well that no explanation shall ever reach them.  That tenebrousness was indeed a positive quality; for it ob- scured such parts of the inner walls as ought to have been re- vealed, and actually burst forth like smoke from its aeon-long imprisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away into the shrunken and gibbous sky on flapping membraneous wings. "
These words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of dead Cthulhu's dream-vigil in his stone vault at R'lyeh, and I felt deeply moved despite my rational beliefs.  A reddish glare, too, seemed to filter through pale undergrowth beyond the endless avenues of forest night. 
The bas-relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and about five by six inches in area; obviously of modern ori- gin.  They, like the subject and material, belonged to something horribly remote and distinct from man- kind as we know it, something frightfully suggestive of old and unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our concep- tions have no part. 
Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even though he saw the city and the Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly again when I think of the horrors that lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space, and of those unhallowed blasphemies from elder stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favoured by a nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them upon the world whenever another earthquake shall heave their mon- strous stone city again to the sun and air.  All this Johansen did not suspect, but God knows he soon saw enough!
I suppose that only a single mountain-top, the hideous monolith-crowned citadel whereon great Cthulhu was buried,

actually emerged from the waters.  Many of his questions seemed highly out of place to his visitor, especially those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults or societies; and Wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silence which he was offered in exchange for an admission of member- ship in some widespread mystical or paganly religious body. 
Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but references to certain of the scattered notes gave me much material for thought - so much, in fact, that only the ingrained skepticism then forming my philosophy can account for my continued dis- trust of the artist.  Wilcox, 7 Thomas St.  As it was, lacking their original letters, I half suspected the compiler of having asked leading questions, or of having edited the correspondence in corrobor- ation of what he had latently resolved to see.  No one could read the old writing now, but things were told by word of mouth.  After vigintillions of years great Cthulhu was loose again, and raven- ing for delight.  Animal fury and orgiastic license here whipped themselves to daemoniac heights by howls and squawking ecstacies that tore and reverberated through those nighted woods like pestilential tempests from the gulfs of hell.  From February 28 to April 2 a large proportion of them had dreamed very bizarre things, the intensity of the dreams being immeasurably the stronger during the period of the sculptor's delirium.  The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated know- ledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the light into the peace and safety of a new dark age. 
This man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strange story of piracy and slaughter.  It was the Sydney Bulletin I have mentioned, for my friend had wide affiliations in all con- ceivable foreign parts; and the picture was a half-tone cut of a hideous stone image almost identical with that which Legrasse had found in the swamp.  Might not the deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptor's data have come to sinis- ter ears? I think Professor Angell died because he knew too much, or because he was likely to learn too much.  Locally, interest was intensified by the obscurity of the cause of death.  There was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as the steam mounted higher and higher the brave

Norwegian drove his vessel head on against the pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the stern of a daemon galleon.  Average people in society and business - New England's traditional "salt of the earth" - gave an almost completely negative result, though scattered cases of uneasy but formless nocturnal im- pressions appear here and there, always between March 23 and April 2 - the period of young Wilcox's delirium. 
It was a simple, rambling thing - a naive sailor's effort at a post-facto diary - and strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage.  The Thing cannot be described - there is no language for such abysms of shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions

of all matter, force, and cosmic order.  Mankind was not absolutely alone among the conscious things of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithful few.  He would write of what he knew before death came, but his wife must not guess. 
That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the tin box beside the bas-relief and the papers of Professor Angell.  This manuscript was divided into two sections, the first of which was headed "1925 - Dream and Dream Work of H.  The statuette, idol, fetish, or whatever it was, had been captured some months before in the wooded swamps south of

New Orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoo meeting; and so singular and hideous were the rites connected with it, that the police could not but realize that they had stumbled on a dark cult totally unknown to them, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of the African voodoo circles. "
On March 23, the manuscript continued, Wilcox failed to ap- pear; and inquiries at his quarters revealed that he had been stricken with an obscure sort of fever and taken to the home of his family in Waterman Street.  For an instant the ship was befouled by an acrid and blinding green cloud, and then there was only a venomous seething astern; where - God in heaven! - the scattered plasticity of that nameless sky-spawn was nebulously recombining in its hateful original form, whilst its distance widened every second as the Alert gained impetus from its mounting steam.  With him he bore the sub- ject of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, and apparently very an- cient stone statuette whose origin he was at a loss to determ- ine.  Collins and First Mate Green, were killed; and the remaining eight under

Second Mate Johansen proceeded to navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in their original direction to see if any reas- on for their ordering back had existed.  It read as follows:
MYSTERY DERELICT FOUND AT SEA
Vigilant Arrives With Helpless Armed New Zealand Yacht in Tow.  There then followed an ex- haustive comparison of details, and a moment of really awed si- lence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual identity of the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds of distance apart.  This original correspondence was not preserved, but his notes formed a thorough and really significant digest. 
That my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor I did not wonder, for what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what Legrasse had learned of the cult, of a sens- itive young man who had dreamed not only the figure and ex- act hieroglyphics of the swamp-found image and the Greenland devil tablet, but had come in his dreams upon at least three of the precise words of the formula uttered alike by Esquimaux diabolists and mongrel Louisianans? Professor Angell's instant

start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness was emin- ently natural; though privately I suspected young Wilcox of having heard of the cult in some indirect way, and of having in- vented a series of dreams to heighten and continue the mys- tery at my uncle's expense.  This thing, which seemed in- stinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was of a somewhat bloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectan- gular block or pedestal covered with undecipherable charac- ters.  It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more ter- rible sort than they had ever known; and some of their women and children had disappeared since the malevolent tom-tom had begun its incessant beating far within the black haunted woods where no dweller ventured. 
But Johansen had not given out yet. 
The region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil repute, substantially unknown and untraversed by white men.  Then came out of the earth the black spirits of earth, mouldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumours picked up in

caverns beneath forgotten sea-bottoms. 
They worshipped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived ages before there were any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky.  In this phantasy of prismatic distortion it moved anomalously in a di- agonal way, so that all the rules of matter and perspective seemed upset.  So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, and pulled desperately for the Alert as the mountainous monstrosity flopped down the slimy stones and hesitated, floundering at the edge of the water.  Rescued Seaman Refuses Par- ticulars of Strange Experience.  But it made men dream, and so they knew enough to keep away.  Once more under control, the ship was making good progress when held up by the Alert on March 22nd, and I could feel the mate's regret as he wrote of her bombardment and sinking.  They all died vast epochs of time before men came, but there were arts which could revive Them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in the cycle of eternity.  These responses from esthetes told disturbing tale. , at 1908 A. 
Steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of all hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of feverish rushing up and down between wheel and engines to get the Alert under way.  From a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at regular intervals with the flame-girt monolith as a centre hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters who had disappeared. A.  The professor had been stricken whilst returning from the Newport boat; falling suddenly; as witnesses said, after having been jostled by a nautical-looking negro who had come from one of the queer dark courts on the precipitous hill- side which formed a short cut from the waterfront to the deceased's home in Williams Street.  My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox afterwards said, for his slowness in recognizing both hieroglyphics and pictorial design.  Tale of Des- perate Battle and Deaths at Sea.  My uncle at once telephoned the family, and from that time forward kept close watch of the case; calling often at the Thayer Street office of Dr. 
Out of that dream came rescue - the Vigilant, the vice-admir- alty court, the streets of Dunedin, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the Egeberg.  Who knows the end? What has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise.  Two Lascar sailors at once helped him to his feet, but before the ambulance could reach him he was dead. 
Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of theosophists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed.  The Emma, in ballast, had cleared Auckland on Febru- ary 20th, and had felt the full force of that earthquake-born tempest which must have heaved up from the sea-bottom the horrors that filled men's dreams. 

The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of panic, mania, and eccentricity during the given period. 
Johansen and his men landed at a sloping mud-bank on this monstrous Acropolis, and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks which could have been no mortal staircase.  Later, it seems, he and one companion boarded the yacht and tried to manage her, but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd, From that time till his rescue on the 12th the man remembers little, and he does not even recall when William Briden, his companion, died.  Five of the worshippers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were carried away on improvised stretchers by their fellow-prisoners.  Profess- or Angell must have employed a cutting bureau, for the num- ber of extracts was tremendous, and the sources scattered throughout the globe.  The muffled beat of tom- toms was now faintly audible far, far ahead; and a curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the wind shifted. ", and the second, "Narrative of Inspector John R.  Once before, it appears, Professor Angell had seen the hellish outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the ominous syllables which can be rendered only as "Cthulhu"; and all this in so stirring and horrible a connection that it is small wonder he pursued young Wilcox with queries and demands for data.  And writ- ing of some kind the bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be; though my memory, despite much the papers and collec- tions of my uncle, failed in any way to identify this particular species, or even hint at its remotest affiliations.  He could not recall having seen the ori- ginal of this thing except in his own dream bas-relief, but the outlines had formed themselves insensibly under his hands.  Longitude 123°43', come upon a coastline of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy Cyclopean ma- sonry which can be nothing less than the tangible substance of earth's supreme terror - the nightmare corpse-city of R'lyeh, that was built in measureless aeons behind history by the vast, loathsome shapes that seeped down from the dark stars. 

Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by Legrasse's men as they ploughed on through the black mor- ass toward the red glare and muffled tom-toms. 
The first half of the principal manuscript told a very particu- lar tale.  Old Castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some years. " The other manuscript papers were brief notes, some of them accounts of the queer dreams of different persons, some of them citations from theosophical books and magazines (notably W.  March 23rd the crew of the Emma landed on an unknown island and left six men dead; and on that date the dreams of sensitive men assumed a heightened vividness and darkened with dread of a giant monster's malign pursuit, whilst an architect had gone mad and a sculptor had lapsed suddenly into delirium! And what of this storm of April 2nd - the date on which all dreams of the dank city ceased, and Wilcox emerged unharmed from the bondage of strange fever? What of all this - and of those hints of old Castro about the sunken, star-born Old Ones and their coming reign; their faithful cult and their mastery of dreams? Was I tottering on the brink of cosmic horrors beyond man's power to bear? If so, they must be horrors of the mind alone, for in some way the second of April had put a stop to whatever monstrous menace had begun its siege of mankind's soul.  This man, Joseph D.  Latit- ude 34°21', W.  Professor Angell, as befitted one of his authority and attainments, had had a prominent part in all the deliberations; and was one of the first to be approached by the several outsiders who took advantage of the convocation to offer questions for correct answering and problems for expert solution.  There was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the chronicler could not put on paper.  After that Johansen only brooded over the idol in the cabin and attended to a few matters of food for himself and the laughing maniac by his side.  A mountain walked or stumbled. 
Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration.  The notes in question were those descriptive of the dreams of various persons covering the same period as that in which young Wilcox had had his strange visitations.  Professor Webb had been engaged, forty-eight years before, in a tour of Greenland and Iceland in search of some Runic in- scriptions which he failed to unearth; and whilst high up on the West Greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of degenerate Esquimaux whose religion, a curious form of devil-worship, chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness.  It is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakably akin to the dream-sculpture of young Wilcox.  Now and then the less organized ululation would cease, and from what seemed a well-drilled chorus of hoarse voices would rise in sing-song chant that hideous phrase or ritual:
"Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn.  But although They no longer lived, They would never really die.  A dispatch from California describes a theosophist colony as donning white robes en masse for some "glorious fulfillment" which never arrives, whilst items from In- dia speak guardedly of serious native unrest toward the end of March 22-23.  Here was a nocturnal suicide in London, where a lone sleeper had leaped from a window after a shock- ing cry.  It savoured of the wildest dreams of myth-maker and theosophist, and disclosed an astonishing degree of cosmic imagination among such half- castes and pariahs as might be least expected to possess it.  But these were not the Great Old Ones.  Whether I shall go as he did remains to be seen, for I have learned much now.  Of the six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of pure fright in that accursed instant.  Of its ori- gin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the captured members, absolutely nothing was to be dis- covered; hence the anxiety of the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place the frightful symbol, and through it track down the cult to its fountain-head.  Castro, apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly secret.  Pronounced well by his physician, he returned to his quarters in three days; but to Professor Angell he was of no further assistance.  Reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refused point-blank to advance another inch toward the scene of un- holy worship, so Inspector Legrasse and his nineteen col- leagues plunged on unguided into black arcades of horror that none of them had ever trod before.  The chanted ritual was not the secret - that was never spoken aloud, only whispered. 
Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the item in detail; and was disappointed to find it of only mod- erate length.  The stars were right again, and what an age-old cult had failed to do by design, a band of innocent sailors had done by accident.  Legrasse for some time lent the im- age to Professor Webb, but at the latter's death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where I viewed it not long ago.  For what could be the meaning of the queer clay bas-relief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which I found? Had my uncle, in his latter years become credulous of the most superficial

impostures? I resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor re- sponsible for this apparent disturbance of an old man's peace of mind.  Knowing that the Thing could surely overtake the Alert until steam was fully up, he re- solved on a desperate chance; and, setting the engine for full speed, ran lightning-like on deck and reversed the wheel.  But of those mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained.  When Professor Angell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant of any cult or system of cryptic lore, he be- sieged his visitor with demands for future reports of dreams.  It was nothing on which I would naturally have stumbled in the course of my daily round, for it was an old number of an Australian journal, the Sydney Bulletin for April 18, 1925. 
Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around tall idols which the Great Ones showed them; idols brought in dim eras from dark stars.  On this now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality than any but a Sime or an Angarola could paint.  Geologists, the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they vowed that the world held no rock like it.  He had cried out in the night, arousing several other artists in the building, and had

manifested since then only alternations of unconsciousness and delirium.  No man had ever seen the Old Ones. , Providence, R. 
My knowledge of the thing began in the winter of 1926-27 with the death of my great-uncle, George Gammell Angell, Pro- fessor Emeritus of Semitic Languages in Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island. 
Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result.  Ugly roots and ma- lignant hanging nooses of Spanish moss beset them, and now and then a pile of dank stones or fragment of a rotting wall in- tensified by its hint of morbid habitation a depression which every malformed tree and every fungous islet combined to cre- ate.  That glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth, flashed out from an accidental piecing together of separ- ated things - in this case an old newspaper item and the notes of a dead professor. .  The charac- ters along the base were equally baffling; and no member present, despite a representation of half the world's expert learning in this field, could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistic kinship.  The odour rising from the newly opened depths was in- tolerable, and at length the quick-eared Hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there.  Then, driven ahead by curiosity in their captured yacht under Johansen's command, the men sight a great stone pillar sticking out of the sea, and in S.  Wilcox was a precocious youth of known genius but great eccentricity, and had from childhood excited attention through the strange stories and odd dreams he was in the habit of relating.  Tobey, whom he learned to be in charge.  From Dunedin

the Alert and her noisome crew had darted eagerly forth as if imperiously summoned, and on the other side of the earth po- ets and artists had begun to dream of a strange, dank Cyc- lopean city whilst a young sculptor had moulded in his sleep the form of the dreaded Cthulhu.  But it is not from them that there came the single glimpse of for- bidden eons which chills me when I think of it and maddens me when I dream of it.  But I do not think my life will be long. .  Latitude 47°9', W. 

The Tale of Inspector Legrasse
The older matters which had made the sculptor's dream and bas-relief so significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of his long manuscript.  Legrasse dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all stood trembling and nearly hypnotised with horror.  Then I thought with a shudder of what Old Castro had told Legrasse about the Old Ones; "They had come from the stars, and had brought Their images with Them. 
I had largely given over my inquiries into what Professor An- gell called the "Cthulhu Cult", and was visiting a learned friend in Paterson, New Jersey; the curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of note.  Loathsome- ness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the tottering cities of men.  . 
Poor Johansen's handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this.  At the end of the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed on in silence through the ter- rible cypress woods where day never came.  He climbed interminably along the grotesque stone moulding - that is, one would call it climbing if the thing was not after all horizontal - and the men wondered how any door in the universe could be so vast.  What seemed to be the main document was headed "CTHULHU CULT" in characters painstakingly printed to avoid the erroneous reading of a word so unheard-of.  My uncle, it seems, had quickly instituted a prodigiously far-flung body of inquires amongst nearly all the friends whom he could question without impertinence, asking for nightly reports of their dreams, and the dates of any notable visions for some time past.  Its designs, however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; for, although the vagaries of cubism and futur- ism are many and wild, they do not often reproduce that cryptic regularity which lurks in prehistoric writing.  And so far

as he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features of the bestial thing now lying before the meeting. "
And now, in response to a general and urgent demand, In- spector Legrasse related as fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshippers; telling a story to which I could see my uncle attached profound significance.  Physicians were unable to find any visible disorder, but concluded after perplexed debate that some obscure lesion of the heart, induced by the brisk as- cent of so steep a hill by so elderly a man, was responsible for the end.  con- sciousness was manifested, perhaps, in shapes and forms long since withdrawn before the tide of advancing humanity. 
It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith and shouted of what he had found.  Some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and the secret cult would always be waiting to liberate him.  It represented a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind.  Of his stirring experience he would tell his friends no more than he had told the admiralty officials, and all they could do was to give me his Oslo address.  He must have been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else the world would by now be screaming with fright and frenzy.  The two sounds frequently repeated are those rendered by the letters "Cthulhu" and "R'lyeh. 
Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed-blooded, and mentally aberrant type. 
Legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had
inquired in vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. 
The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse's tale, corroborated as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent correspondence of those who attended; although scant mention occurs in the formal publications of the society.  Besides nameless rites and human sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary rituals ad- dressed to a supreme elder devil or tornasuk; and of this Pro- fessor Webb had taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged angekok or wizard-priest, expressing the sounds in Roman let- ters as best he knew how.  It was nightmare itself, and to see it was to die.  Later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious expression in dreams, in the bas-relief, and in the terrible statue I now beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent one.  It must not be fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least interest in archaeology.  Tobey, convinced the profess- or that it must be identical with the nameless monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dream-sculpture.  Death would be a boon if only it could blot out the memories.  Void of clothing, this hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing, and writhing about a monstrous ring-shaped bonfire; in the centre of which, revealed by occasional rifts in the curtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eight feet in height; on top of which, incongruous in its diminutiveness, rested the noxious carven statuette.  The Emma, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her course by the great storm of March 1st, and on March 22nd, in S.  But of them old Castro dared not speak much.  There was a secret which even torture could not extract. 
One thing I began to suspect, and which I now fear I know, is that my uncle's death was far from natural.  Much of the material which I correlated will be later published by the American Ar- chaeological Society, but there was one box which I found ex- ceedingly puzzling, and which I felt much averse from showing to other eyes.  Had my uncle referred to these cases by name instead of merely by number, I should have attempted some corroboration and personal investigation; but as it was, I succeeded in tracing down only a few. 
Donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and rejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the monstrously carven portal.  Meanwhile the cult, by appropriate rites, must keep alive the memory of those ancient ways and shadow forth the prophecy of their return.  Remains of Them, he said the deathless Chinamen had told him, were still be found as Cyclopean stones on islands in the Pacific.  The next day, it ap- pears, they raised and landed on a small island, although none is known to exist in that part of the ocean; and six of the men somehow died ashore, though Johansen is queerly reticent about this part of his story, and speaks only of their falling into a rock chasm.  One could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the relative position of everything else seemed phantasmally variable.  I mention his talk about angles because it suggests something Wilcox had told me of his awful dreams.  There is a sense of spectral whirling through liquid gulfs of infinity, of dizzying rides through reeling universes on a comets tail, and of hyster- ical plunges from the pit to the moon and from the moon back again to the pit, all livened by a cachinnating chorus of the dis- torted, hilarious elder gods and the green, bat-winged mocking imps of Tartarus.  Four of them reeled, one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened.  Then, very softly and slowly, the acre-great lintel began to give in- ward at the top; and they saw that it was balanced.  He did not try to navigate after the first bold flight, for the reaction had taken something out of his soul. " I made the brief trip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the door of a neat and ancient building with plastered front.  The time would be easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the Great Old Ones; free and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and morals thrown aside and all men shouting and killing and reveling in joy.  He said, "It is new, indeed, for I made it last night in a dream of strange cities; and dreams are older than brooding Tyre, or the con- templative Sphinx, or garden-girdled Babylon. 
That evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I bade my host adieu and took a train for San Francisco.  They were Donovan, Guerrera, and Angstrom.  God! What wonder that across the earth a great ar- chitect went mad, and poor Wilcox raved with fever in that telepathic instant? The Thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to claim his own.  On April 12th the derelict was sighted; and though apparently deserted, was found upon boarding to contain one survivor in a half-delirious condition and one man who had evidently been dead for more than a week.  That he really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncle's relentless catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again I strove to think of some way in which he could possibly have received the weird impressions.  Then came the storm of April 2nd, and a gather- ing of the clouds about his consciousness. 
After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with sea- men and members of the vice-admiralty court.  One Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. 
Johansen's voyage had begun just as he told it to the vice-ad- miralty.  But memory never died, and the high- priests said that the city would rise again when the stars were right.  I now felt gnawing at my vitals that dark terror which will never leave me till I, too, am at rest; "accidentally" or otherwise.  Everyone listened, and everyone was listening still when It lumbered slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green immens- ity through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that poison city of madness.  They all lay in stone houses in Their great city of R'lyeh, preserved by the spells of mighty Cthulhu for a glorious resurrection when the stars and the earth might once more be ready for Them. 
On April 2 at about 3 P.  At length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove in sight; and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group of bobbing lanterns.  Of the swarthy cult-fiends on the Alert he speaks with significant horror. "
Shaken with such a mental resolution as I had never before known, I now resolved to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo.  Legrasse, 121 Bienville St. 
Meanwhile no more must be told.  His ac- cursed city is sunken once more, for the Vigilant sailed over the spot after the April storm; but his ministers on earth still bellow and prance and slay around idol-capped monoliths in lonely places. 
He had not long survived his return, said his wife, for the do- ings at sea in 1925 had broken him.  A time will come - but I must not and cannot think! Let me pray that, if I do not survive this manuscript, my executors may put caution before audacity and see that it meets no other eye.  We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far.  He fell on a narrow

hill street leading up from an ancient waterfront swarming with foreign mongrels, after a careless push from a Negro sail- or.  All of these, however, bore out the notes in full.  In less than a month I was in Dunedin; where, however, I found that little was known of the strange cult-members who had lingered in the old sea-taverns.  I have often wondered if all the ob- jects of the professor's questioning felt as puzzled as did this fraction. 
These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed altogether of flesh and blood.  Galvez, I later met and questioned; and he proved distractingly imaginative. 
The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a stack of press cuttings, in Professor Angell's most recent hand; and made no pretense to literary style.  When, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the Great Old Ones spoke to the sensitive among them by moulding their dreams; for only thus could Their lan- guage reach the fleshly minds of mammals. 
This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but what a train of ideas it started in my mind! Here were new treasuries of data on the Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had strange interests at sea as well as on land.  The squatters there, mostly primitive but good- natured descendants of Lafitte's men, were in the grip of stark terror from an unknown thing which had stolen upon them in the night.  He questioned the sculptor with scientific minuteness; and studied with frantic in- tensity the bas-relief on which the youth had found himself working, chilled and clad only in his night clothes, when wak- ing had stolen bewilderingly over him. 
The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and careful study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exquisitely artistic workmanship.  There are vo- cal qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualities peculiar to beasts; and it is terrible to hear the one when the source should yield the other.  Legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but in Norway a certain seaman who saw things is dead. 
The aperture was black with a darkness almost material.  A pulpy, tentacled head surmoun- ted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary wings; but it was the general outline of the whole which made it most shock- ingly frightful.  The spells that preserved them intact likewise prevented Them from making an initial move, and They could only lie awake in the dark and think whilst uncounted millions of years rolled by.  But before many questions were asked, it became manifest that something far deeper and older than Negro fetishism was in- volved. 
In the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed Old Ones in dreams, but then something happened.  Of the cult, he said that he thought the centre lay amid the pathless desert of Arabia, where Irem, the City of Pil- lars, dreams hidden and untouched.  I did not en- large his knowledge in this regard, but sought with some sub- tlety to draw him out.  His card bore the name of Henry Anthony Wilcox, and my uncle had recognized him as the youngest son of an excellent family slightly known to him, who had latterly been studying sculpture at the Rhode Island School of Design and living alone at the Fleur-de-Lys Building near that institution.  But I was then convinced that young Wilcox had known of the older matters mentioned by the professor.  All traces of strange dreaming had vanished with his recovery, and my uncle kept no record of his night-thoughts after a week of pointless and irrelevant accounts of thoroughly usual visions.  I visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse and others of that old-time raiding-party, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel pris- oners as still survived.  Longitude 152°17', with one living and one dead man aboard.  They and their subconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he shewed me a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake with the potency of its black suggestion.  This was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed and always would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the world until the time when the great priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the

mighty city of R'lyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again beneath his sway.  Even the Providence Art Club, anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found him quite hopeless.  Professor Angell was widely known as an authority on ancient inscriptions, and had frequently been resorted to by the heads of prominent museums; so that his passing at the age of ninety-two may be recalled by many.  Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that was not of earth the titan Thing from the stars slavered and gibbered like Polypheme cursing the fleeing ship of Odysseus.  He called himself "psychically hyper- sensitive", but the staid folk of the ancient commercial city dis- missed him as merely "queer.  Over a fourth of those who reported any- thing, reported scenes and half-sounds not unlike those which Wilcox had described; and some of the dreamers confessed acute fear of the gigantic nameless thing visible toward the last.  That cult would never die till the stars came right again, and the secret priests would take great Cthulhu from His tomb to revive His subjects and resume His rule of earth.  Odd Idol Found in His Posses- sion. 
This data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembled members, proved doubly exciting to Inspector Legrasse; and he began at once to ply his informant with ques- tions.  The cuttings largely alluded to outré mental illness and outbreaks of group folly or mania in the spring of 1925.  At the time I saw no reason to dissent from this dictum, but latterly I am inclined to wonder - and more than wonder.  It appears that on March 1st, 1925, a thin, dark young man of neurotic and excited aspect had called upon Professor Angell bearing the singular clay bas-relief, which was then ex- ceedingly damp and fresh.  Persuading the widow that my con- nection with her husband's "technical matters" was sufficient to entitle me to his manuscript, I bore the document away and began to read it on the London boat.  He indeed went so far as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a glimpse of shining eyes and a mountainous white bulk bey- ond the remotest trees but I suppose he had been hearing too much native superstition.  A weird bunch of cuttings, all told; and I can at this date scarcely envisage the callous rationalism with which I set them aside. 
Cthulhu still lives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has shielded him since the sun was young. 
So a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an auto- mobile, had set out in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide. "
Legrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several among his mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the words meant. , which was sighted April 12th in S.  What I now heard so graphically at first- hand, though it was really no more than a detailed confirma- tion of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh; for I felt sure that I was on the track of a very real, very secret, and very ancient religion whose discovery would make me an an- thropologist of note.  As Wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was all wrong.  It had been locked and I did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine the personal ring which the pro- fessor carried in his pocket. "
Only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged, and the rest were committed to various institutions.  The chant meant only this: "In his house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.  Then Donovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing each point separately as he went.  But at that time some force from outside must serve to liberate Their bodies.  This text, as given, ran something like this:
"In his house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming. M. .  I.  Longitude 128°34', encountered the Alert, manned by a queer and evil-looking crew of Kanakas and half-castes.  There were insane shouts

and harrowing screams, soul-chilling chants and dancing devil- flames; and, the frightened messenger added, the people could stand it no more.  He sat upright in bed, astonished to find him- self at home and completely ignorant of what had happened in dream or reality since the night of March 22.  Cable advices from Dunedin report that the Alert was well known there as an island trader, and bore an evil reputation along the waterfront, It was owned by a curious group of half-castes whose frequent meetings and night trips to the woods attracted no little curiosity; and it had set sail in great haste just after the storm and earth tremors of March 1st.  The great stone city R'lyeh, with its monoliths and sepulchers, had sunk beneath the waves; and the deep waters, full of the one primal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut off the spectral intercourse. 
And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed defeat at the Inspector's problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch of bizarre famili- arity in the monstrous shape and writing, and who presently told with some diffidence of the odd trifle he knew.  Johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping Babylon of elder daemons, and must have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this or of any sane planet.  They had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought Their images with Them.  Reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the young man's subsidence into lethargy.  Briden's death re- veals no apparent cause, and was probably due to excitement or exposure.  In Auck- land I learned that Johansen had returned with yellow hair turned white after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at Sydney, and had thereafter sold his cottage in West Street and sailed with his wife to his old home in Oslo.  Wilcox, I was sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon forgotten it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining.  The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter beginning tomorrow, at which every effort will be made to induce Johansen to speak more freely than he has done hitherto.  The reception of his request seems to have varied; but he must, at the very least, have received more responses

than any ordinary man could have handled without a secretary.