 Osama bin Laden, 
the leader of alQaeda, had been living in Kandahar when the attack on the World Trade Center 
happened, and the Americans had sent thousands of troops to Afghanistan to catch him and overthrow 
the Taliban regime which had protected him.  They used the big hall in the mosque, where they taught more than a 
hundred children ranging from five to fifteen years old.  The journey took at least five hours by road over the Malakand Pass, a vast 
bowl of mountains where long ago our ancestors led by a preacher called Mullah Saidullah (known 
by the British as the Mad Fakir) battled British forces among the craggy peaks.  But we always come together against outsiders who try to conquer our lands.  She even helped whitewash the school walls, holding up the lanterns so they could paint 
when the light went off in power cuts.  Was 
it because of the cry of a woman? 

When the waters receded, they found their home and school destroyed: their furniture, carpets, 
books, clothes and the audio system entirely caked in thick foulsmelling mud.  Fortunately my grandmother found him before a fire started.  They were usually about love or being a 
Pashtun.  Our family and friends said they had thought it was the end of the world.  

Some boys from my fathers district went off to fight in Afghanistan.  Whatever you thought about Nek Mohammad, we were not at war 
with the Americans and were shocked that they would launch attacks from the sky on our soil.  We will be buried in our beds! she cried.  The best that most village boys could 
hope for was to go to Saudi Arabia or Dubai and work in construction.  Eighty people were killed including boys 
as young as twelve, some of whom had come from Swat.  If we advertise we wont be able to watch it.  I read that Benazir Bhutto insisted on wearing glass 
bangles at her wedding to set an example but the tradition of adorning the bride still continued.  As I threw the rubbish on the mountain of rotting food, I saw something 
move and I jumped.  Can you sell them to me for ten 
rupees? she asked.  

The school was founded by my father before I was born, and on the wall above us khushal 
school was painted proudly in red and white letters.  In fact, as my mother often reminds 
my father, he was not present for the actual ceremony.  

A few weeks later the same teacher told him that he could no longer teach girls as the maulana 
doesnt like it.  He held a big meeting in Malakand, where our ancestors had fought the 
British.  Our people see conspiracies 
behind everything, and many argued that the attack was actually carried out by Jews as an excuse for 
America to launch a war on the Muslim world.  It happened in a 
manner so dramatic that it sounds like something out of a movie.  When he got the job he gave his age 
as much younger than my grandfather.  

When I was born we were very poor.  For a while her daughters also had to collect 
rubbish to survive.  He was also an imam at the local mosque.  You think he will be happy with tea? He wants his money.  He and his fellow activists were holding endless meetings.  He is lying.  But 
Alexander was a determined and patient leader.  He made him wait nine months but finally agreed.  In some places, 
when the helicopters flew in the locals all rushed underneath them, which meant they could not drop 
supplies safely.  We think of Jehanzebs reign as a golden period in our history.  When girls disappeared it was not 
always because they had been married off.  

My father prayed they would agree, but my grandfather asked them as soon as they arrived, 
exhausted after the threeday bus journey, and his soninlaw refused outright.  

The school continued to lose money.  Moniba always knew if something was wrong.  You write the speech and I will learn it 

My grandfather was famous for his speeches.  Back then, they said, the mountains were all still covered in trees, there were 
schools every five kilometres and the wali sahib would visit them in person to resolve problems.  Most of us were crying and 
our teachers were praying.  

I remember that the bus turned right off the main road at the army checkpoint as always and rounded 
the corner past the deserted cricket ground.  I have a school, but I am neither a khan nor a political leader.  I 
have no platform, he said.  Besides, he had a family to provide for.  But while people were happy to talk to him, they preferred to send their 
children to established schools.  The brides would wear exquisite clothes and be draped in gold, necklaces 
and bangles given by both sides of the family.  Girls like me who still went to school he 
called buffaloes and sheep.  He knew that to do this he needed some power of 
his own, so he joined an organisation called the Swat Association of Private Schools.  It was hard for the authorities to reach places like Shangla because 
most of the roads and bridges had gone and local government had been wiped out throughout the 
region.  Sometimes 
he would say, Men, go outside now.  He built a wooden ramp from which his catapults and 
arrows could reach the top of the mountain.  They take out loans from state banks but they dont pay them back.  

My mother was unmoved.  The president of the students group in Jehanzeb College was Ihsan ulHaq 
Haqqani.  There was a major problem, however.  They knew he was 
insecure about his looks because at school the teachers always favoured the handsome boys for their 
fair skin.  I wore more fashionable clothes and didnt cover my 
face even when I became a teenager.  His own father said it was up to him and agreed to send a barber as a messenger, which is 
the traditional way we Pashtuns do this.  

We lived in Mingora, the biggest town in the valley, in fact the only city.  He wanted to encourage 
independent thought and hated the way the school he was at rewarded obedience above open 
mindedness and creativity.  Many did, and they set off, armed with old rifles or just axes and 
bazookas.  Jinnah said, No 
struggle can ever succeed without women participating side by side with men.  In our society you have to take revenge for such slights, but my father was 
much smaller than his cousins.  My father would buy maize and stay up late at night making and bagging popcorn.  My 
fathers close friend Wahid Zamans brother and brotherinlaw were among the many who went to 
Afghanistan.  I used to go to her house to study, so whenever I was there I would 
pocket her things, mostly toy jewellery like earrings and necklaces.  I am a 
Muslim.  
Sunni comes from the Arabic for one who follows the traditions of the Prophet.  I didnt agree.  

But not immediately.  My father 
always says its important to treat friends well.  

The mufti started to object but my father had had enough.  The school that my father dreamed of would have desks and a library, computers, 
bright posters on the walls and, most important, washrooms.  Some of them whistled, 
believing this would attract the fish.  Little did we know that years later the same maulana s organisation would become the 
Swat Taliban.  

After Mullah FM had been on air for about a year, Fazlullah became more aggressive.  

When our bus was called, we ran down the steps.  When my father asked why, he explained it was his villages turn to work on 
Fazlullahs buildings.  My valley, the Swat Valley, is a heavenly 
kingdom of mountains, gushing waterfalls and crystalclear lakes, welcome to paradise, it says on a 
sign as you enter the valley.  If we did 
not mend our ways and introduce shariat or Islamic law, they shouted in their thundering voices, 
more severe punishment would come.  
He had an old radio set my uncle still has, on which he loved to listen to the news.  While boys and men could roam freely about town, my mother and I could not go 
out without a male relative to accompany us, even if it was a fiveyearold boy! This was the 
tradition.  Her name 
means Queen of Light and she said she wanted to be Pakistans first female army chief.  Our people often quote the famous speech he made a few days before independence: You 
are free to go to your temples, you are free to go to your mosques or to any other place of worship in 
this State of Pakistan.  Then they disappeared off to Islamabad if they were elected to the National 
Assembly, or Peshawar for the Provincial Assembly, and wed hear no more of them or their 
promises.  

There was not much to do in the area where they lived so when the day arrived there was a huge 
gathering.  I was sitting on the left between Moniba and a 
girl from the year below called Shazia Ramzan, holding our exam folders to our chests and our school 
bags under our feet.  

For most Pashtuns its a gloomy day when a daughter is born.  

Within a few months my mother was expecting.  My grandfather, Janser Khan, had been listening to Radio Afghanistan just 
before she was born and heard the name.  My father returned to the village every two or three weeks to see her.  Older people often looked back nostalgically to 
the days of the last wali.  There his luck changed.  I remembered the story of my father surprising 
my grandfather and longed to do the same.  He took the tree, drew a line like a lollipop from his name and at the end of it 
he wrote, Malala.  It has hotels, 
colleges, a golf course and a famous bazaar for buying our traditional embroidery, gemstones and 
anything you can think of.  

At Eid we usually sacrifice animals like goats or sheep.  He took off his turban and put it in my fathers lap.  I think you should go and see Dr Haider Ali! 

Dr Haider Ali was a wellknown psychiatrist in our area, so to say, Shall we take you to Dr 
Haider Ali? meant Are you mad? 

The mufti went quiet.  

Then I remember I am in Birmingham, England.  

His own village school had been just a small building.  My father said it was sad that they could never return as they needed to keep working 
to maintain their families new lifestyle.  Then we have the Deobandi, named after 
another famous nineteenth century madrasa in Uttar Pradesh, this time in the village of Deoband.  He told 
other boys to stop playing marbles in the dust and to play cricket instead so their clothes and hands 
wouldnt get dirty.  The other girls all covered their heads before 
emerging from the door and climbing up into the back.  We must have been less than 200 metres from the checkpoint.  Besides he had seven other children to think about.  It used to be a small place 
but many people had moved in from surrounding villages, making it dirty and crowded.  
He sent my father to the government high school to learn English and receive a modern education 
rather than to a madrasa, even though as an imam people criticised him for this.  It was a perfect night with stars and a full moon just 
above the trees, which he took to be a sign.  Im not against you personally, I just 
want every girl to go to school.  By the roadside were fresh springs 
and waterfalls, and when we stopped for a break and to drink some tea, the air was clean and fragrant 
with cedar and pine.  To 
make us wash, our aunts told stories about a scary woman called Shashaka, who would come after 
you with her muddy hands and stinking breath if you didnt take a bath or wash your hair, and turn you 
into a dirty woman with hair like rats tails filled with insects.  

I felt a terrible sinking feeling in my stomach.  

My fathers dislike of Baba s frugality has made him a very generous man both materially and in 
spirit.  Even the Queen of England came, and stayed in the White Palace that was built from the 
same marble as the Taj Mahal by our king, the first wali of Swat.  Hardly any 
women from these areas can read.  My mother always told me, Hide your face people are looking at 
you.  Being loved by such a beautiful 
girl gave him confidence.  He and his family lived 
with my grandfather, and whenever he saved up enough of his salary, they built a small concrete hujra 
at the side of the house for guests.  My father was in the school waiting and 



when he heard the news he came running.  Take care of your husband and be 
happy.  

These were strangelooking men with long straggly hair and beards and camouflage vests over their 
shalwar kamiz, which they wore with the trousers well above the ankle.  That maulana has a bad eye 
onus, said my father one day.  Soon our prisons were full of cases like that of a thirteenyearold 
girl who was raped and become pregnant and was then sent to prison for adultery because she 
couldnt produce four male witnesses to prove it was a crime.  I remember that inside the dyna it was hot and sticky.  When the call came, my father 
and the Islamic studies teacher went out to confront him.  He used to climb up electricity poles to hang banners advertising the school, even though 
he was so afraid of heights that when he got to the top of the ladder his feet shook.  His name was Malak Bakht Baidar.  Aside from corruption and bad government, my fathers 
main concern in those days was the environment.  

As my father had found with Naeem, it is not easy to mix business and friendship.  A woman couldnt even open a bank 
account without a mans permission.  She loved him so much that she would slip him extra meat and the cream off the milk while 
she went without.  He became determined to end the traditional rivalry between him and his cousins.  Thats why I dont want to greet you 

Then one of the other men spoke up.  As 
his wife, she wanted to help him achieve that.  If the school has two teachers, each 
goes in for three days and signs the other in.  So one night he invited all the chiefs to a 
banquet and set his men on them while they were eating.  Why dont they want girls to go to 
school? I asked my father.  

My mother and father tell each other everything so Aba soon found out why I was so sad.  I am talking to the women Then hed say, Women are meant to 
fulfil their responsibilities in the home.  To her it was a modern town.  
Fazlullah exploited this ignorance.  At the back of the house was a 
veranda where the women gathered.  Fazlullah hated the Bollywood movies we so 
loved, which he denounced as unIslamic.  We were all horrified by the attack and 
people swore revenge.  

So I was born a proud daughter of Pakistan, though like all Swatis I thought of myself first as Swati 
and then Pashtun, before Pakistani.  

But the expression on the mans face was mocking.  

By then my father was becoming a wellknown figure in Swat.  Instead he just called himself 
Ziauddin Yousafzai, our clan name.  My father often used to recite the poem to 
me when I was a child but I didnt know then what it meant.  

My country may not be very old but unfortunately it already has a history of military coups, and 
when my father was eight a general called Zia ulHaq seized power.  There are men in the reception area of the school, and they see the girls enter, and this 
is very bad.  We learned that the first wife of the Prophet was a 
businesswoman called Khadijah.  We all call her Bhabi now.  On the left were steps up to a flat roof big 
enough for us children to play cricket on.  When my father tells me stories of his childhood, he always 
says that though Baba was a difficult man he gave him the most important gift the gift of education.  He introduced himself as an Islamic reformer and an 
interpreter of the Quran.  

My friends and I couldnt understand why it was so wrong.  From early on I could 
feel I was different from my sisters, my father says.  And on and on it goes.  These are bad days.  She will cook and wash for us.  They 
retreated after just twelve days and reached what they called a negotiated peace settlement with 
local militant leaders like Nek Mohammad.  He 
pleaded with his father but to no avail.  

My father said the radio station was the talk of the staffroom.  Together they studied all the thirty chapters of the Quran, not just recitation but also 
interpretation, something few boys do.  Some people celebrated by handing out 
sweets as Sharif was unpopular, but my father cried when he heard the news.  There was a day 
when it did not stop raining and in the late afternoon there was a warning of flooding.  But also give him quiet time to ponder the eternal 
mystery of birds in the sky, bees in the sun, and the flowers on a green hillside, it says.  He remembered 
how mystified he had been by the river in his village, wondering where the water came from and went 
to, until he learned about the water cycle from the rain to the sea.  Then she said, Hoo she yarV or 
Attention! and we clicked our heels again.  Even the woodpeckers.  There were live 
electric cables hanging loose and swaying in the wind.  In the winter everything was white snow, long icicles hanging from the roof like daggers, 
which we loved to snap off.  One Talib could 
intimidate a whole village.  Though he usually dressed in 
uniform, he occasionally wore Western suits and he called himself chief executive instead of chief 
martial law administrator.  As a teacher he was 
eligible for a discount on his sons school fees for sports and joining the Boy Scouts.  Our house 
was in Gulkada, which means place of flowers, but it used to be called Butkara, or place of the 



Buddhist statues.  They praised Fazlullah and talked 
of his long hair, the way he rode a horse and behaved like the Prophet.  At least I didnt have to wear one.  It is often 
said that teachers dont like to be posted to such remote schools and generally make a deal with their 
colleagues so that only one of them has to go to work each day.  



My father could listen no more.  There was no way they 
could pay this so my father asked one of his political friends to use his influence.  Many of those killed 
were children who like me had been at school that morning.  The 
celebration of Western holidays such as Valentines Day and New Years Eve was allowed.  Once she was ready, the bride would start crying and we 
would stroke her hair and try to convince her not to worry.  During the Afghan 
jihad many madrasas had been built, most of them funded by Saudi money, and many young men had 
passed through them as it was free education.  Some of our newspapers printed stories that no Jews 
went to work at the World Trade Center that day.  The total came to more than one million rupees.  Her name Tor Pekai means raven tresses even though 
her hair is chestnut brown.  Had they done so, he would have been electrocuted.  His face would redden and he 
would throw kettles and pots around. 6 on the 
Richter Scale and was felt as far away as Kabul and Delhi.  He joked to my father that if either of them had relatives 
to stay, they should pay a fine.  There was also a shed with a wooden waterwheel providing power to turn huge 
millstones to grind wheat and maize into flour, which young boys would then pour into sacks.  Each of these strands has many different subgroups.  .  As a nation we have always been good at hockey, but Zia made 



our female hockey players wear baggy trousers instead of shorts, and stopped women playing some 
sports altogether.  The college 
was in Saidu Sharif, the twin town of Mingora, and he had no family there with whom he could stay.  Yet he says he was actually lucky.  Mullahs from the TNSM preached that the earthquake was a warning from God.  We regard Mians as noble or landed 
people, but Gujars and Kohistanis are what we call hilly people, peasants who look after buffaloes.  Ziauddin, we dont even 
have a Ty he pointed out.  In Pakistan, madrasas are a kind of welfare system as they give free food and lodging, 
but their teaching does not follow a normal curriculum.  

When he returned a few days later he was ashen.  It was the first targeted killing in Swat, and people said it was because 
he had helped the army find Taliban hideouts.  That 
changing climate made Ghulamullah bold.  My father would get angry sometimes he 
would arrive home at lunchtime and call out, Tor Pekai, Im home! only to find she was out and 
there was no lunch for him Then he would find she was at the hospital visiting someone who was ill, 
or had gone to help a family, so he could not stay cross.  There is no time limit.  She might even kill you.  He was made 
general secretary of the Pakhtoon Students Federation (PSF), which wanted equal rights for Pashtuns.  I dont remember any more.  

When he finally found my father, he learned that he had heard a woman crying that her husband was 
trapped in their house and he had rushed in to save him.  It could hardly have been a 
bloodier beginning.  Dont tell Aba, I begged.  They provided free 
textbooks and grants to students but held deeply intolerant views and their favourite pastime was to 
patrol universities and sabotage music concerts.  

One day my father told Hidayatullah he was going back to his village for a few days.  We should not kill her.  He 
then took out the lump and presented it to my grandmother to give to my father, a little each day.  We would cry in terror, though in 
fact as toe and finger in Pashto is the same, we were all twenty fingered, but we didnt realise.  Within an hour of the announcement on television of Musharraf s sacking, tanks were on the 
streets and troops had taken over the newsrooms and the airports.  My 
mother was terrified it would collapse on top of us so we kept going outside.  People later said that some of this money had been diverted to finance a plot 
to bomb planes travelling from Britain to the US.  
Everyone brought what they could.  The highest mountain of all is the 
pyramid shaped Mount Elum To us its a sacred mountain and so high that it always wears a 
necklace of fleecy clouds.  As the tremors 
continued they had spent the entire day outdoors and then the night too, huddling together for warmth, 
even though it was bitterly cold in the mountains.  Wed be expected to cook and serve our 
brothers and fathers.  I shared my room with my cousin 
Aneesa from the village, who had come to live with us so she could go to school, and a girl called 
Shehnaz whose mother Sultana had once worked in our house.  Ten days later a suicide bomber blew himself up in the army barracks at 
Dargai, on the way from Islamabad to Swat, and killed fortytwo Pakistani soldiers.  
The bus strained and laboured, the driver cursing as trucks overtook us on blind bends with steep 
drops below.  

My mother is very beautiful and my father adored her as if she were a fragile china vase, never 
laying a hand on her, unlike many of our men.  

After a couple of rulers who did not work out, in 1917 the chiefs settled on a man called Miangul 
Abdul Wadood as their king.  They dont accept our 
saints and shrines many Pakistanis are also mystical people and gather at Sufi shrines to dance and 
worship.  Children sometimes froze to death in winter.  

But some aid did get in.  During my fathers first term at 
college national elections were held, which were won by Benazir Bhutto, daughter of the prime 
minister who had been executed when my father was a boy.  He set up the first telephone system and built the first 
primary school and ended the wesh system because the constant moving between villages meant no 
one could sell land or had any incentive to build better houses or plant fruit trees.  Moniba and I had been reading the Twilight books 
and longed to be vampires.  

I would listen rapt as he told stories of warring tribes, Pashtun leaders and saints, often through 
poems that he read in a melodious voice, crying sometimes as he read.  His name was Ghulamullah and he called himself a mufti, which means he is 
an Islamic scholar and authority on Islamic law, though my father complains that anyone with a turban 
can call themselves a maulana or mufti.  I wont tell anyone.  In the morning 
the sun reflected off the top of Tor Ghar; when we got up for the fajr prayers, the first of our five 
daily prayers, we would look left and see the golden peak of Spin Ghar lit with the first rays of the 
sun like a white lady wearing a jumar tika a gold chain on her forehead.  

The mullah looked down embarrassed because greeting someone properly is important in Islam.  Though later he became less regular in his 
prayers, in those days he used to leave home at dawn every morning to walk to a mosque in another 
village, where he studied the Quran with a senior talib.  Even so my father insisted on starting the day in style by singing the national anthem.  We would get into 
two groups, each supposed to be a family, then each family would have to betroth a girl so we could 
perform a marriage ceremony.  My mother was sitting on the floor pounding 
spices, brightly coloured turmeric and cumin, filling the air with their aroma.  Millions of Muslims crossed from India, and Hindus travelled in the other 
direction.  The 
government promised they would all be looked after by the state, but that felt as empty as most 
government promises.  It was my mother who would go to the market, shop for us and cook.  My mother was 
helped by a neighbour who had delivered babies before.  One of my fathers friends 
is a Shia and he cries whenever he talks about Husseins death at Karbala.  When the sun hit a certain rock, we 
used to say our asr or afternoon prayers.  Fazlullahs men collected 
them into huge heaps on the streets and set them on fire, creating clouds of thick black smoke that 
reached high into the sky.  As in most families, the girls stayed at home while the boys went to school.  He immediately went and bought the whole lot from 
the man and put them in a glass dish.  Its horrible to feel unworthy in the eyes of your parents.  The previous tenants had also run a school the Ramada School.  I think there was some problem with hygiene in that muddy place, says my father.  

My grandmother kept his spirits up he was her favourite and she believed great things lay in store 
for him.  

That earthquake of 8 October 2005 turned out to be one of the worst in history.  

As we got older the village began to seem boring.  Pekai, help me resolve my contusion on this, he 
would say.  I told my friends at school about the rubbishdump children and that we should help.  

Dont worry replied my father.  The women would not be attacked if they went to the markets, 
but the Taliban would shout at them and threaten them until they stayed at home.  

My father was in awe of my grandfather and told me wonderful stories about him, but he also told 
me that he was a man who could not meet the high standards he set for others.  Haqqani says he is sure my father would have been president of the PSF and become a 
politician if he had been from a rich khan family.  
But all this time the mufti was watching.  Tables were 
set up for the women to hand over their wedding bangles and necklaces and women queued up to do 
so or sent their sons.  

His men stopped health workers giving polio drops, saying the vaccinations were an American plot 
to make Muslim women infertile so that the people of Swat would die out.  By then our schools had about seventy 
teachers, around forty men and thirty women.  I 
was different I never hid my desire when I changed from wanting to be a doctor to wanting to be an 
inventor or a politician.  

There was little to do in my fathers village.  

I have a solution, said my father.  

He had however neglected to tell his partner.  But now I had two other girls in the 
room I want space! Id cry.  The only television was in the hujra of one of 
the wealthier families, and no one had a computer.  After my father had graduated from 
school he had nothing to do so he volunteered to help his brother.  
It was cramped with twenty girls and three teachers.  By the time I was born it 
had five or six teachers and around a hundred pupils paying a hundred rupees a month.  They also said it wasnt up to us to sort 
out the problem.  
You run the haram school, he said.  A publishing company in Lahore which 
supplied our schoolbooks sent five trucks of food and other essentials.  

My grandfather had studied in India, where he had seen great speakers and leaders including 
Mohammad Ali Jinnah (the founder of Pakistan), Jawaharlal Nehru, Mahatma Gandhi and Khan Abdul 
Ghaffar Khan, our great Pashtun leader who campaigned for independence.  My father always said, Malala will be free as a 
bird.  He tried to talk to them but they ran away.  He wanted a land of 
tolerance.  

Occasionally there would be real weddings with big feasts which went on for days and left the 
family bankrupt or in debt.  The Americans said that bin Laden s deputy Ayman alZawahiri was 
hiding in Bajaur and had taken a wife there.  The 
Americans cut off aid.  Whenever there is trouble people pray a lot.  This group is more Arab influenced and even more 
conservative than the others.  Thats also why we rarely say thank you, manana, because we believe 
a Pashtun will never forget a good deed and is bound to reciprocate at some point, just as he will a 
bad one.  He watched paralysed with fear as they almost 
touched the water.  
Miss Soandso has stopped going to school and will go to heaven, hed say, or, Miss X of Y 
village has stopped education at Class 5.  1 congratulate her.  

As the khushal School started to attract more pupils, we moved again and finally had a television.  The village was very poor, but when we arrived our extended family would lay on a big 
feast.  The couple 
would soon be arriving in the village as they were coming to offer condolences after my 
grandmothers death.  But from an early age he had been a 
questioning kind of boy who rarely took anything at face value, even though our education at 
government schools meant learning by rote and pupils were not supposed to question teachers.  

Bin Laden and his men fled to the White Mountains of Tora Bora in eastern Afghanistan, where he 
had built a network of tunnels while fighting the Russians.  We 
have fields of wild flowers, orchards of delicious fruit, emerald mines and rivers full of trout.  He also spoke Persian and Arabic and cared 
deeply for words.  So when my father announced his 
desire to ask for the hand of my mother, Tor Pekai, it was clear neither side would welcome the 
marriage.  I arrived at dawn as the last star blinked out.  She looked like I imagined Shashaka, the dirty woman they told us about in tales in the village 
to make us wash.  This means soulmate in Persian, and he always called me that at 
the start of the day.  Im starving! There was silence.  Their village of Barkana was very primitive and they lived 
crammed together in a one storey ramshackle house with a mud roof which leaked whenever it rained 
or snowed.  He told people, I know there is something different about 
this child.  My grandfather would rail against the class system, the continuing power of the khans and the 
gap between the haves and havenots.  They glimpsed enough of each other to 
know they liked one another, but for us it is taboo to express such things.  
The Taliban have never come for a small girl.  Ignorance allowed politicians to fool people and 
bad administrators to be reelected.  So he went to 
the school most days and actually tried to teach the children.  

My father was right to think this man was not going to give up mullahs had become more 
powerful figures since Zias rule and campaign of Islamisation.  He appointed the first 
woman governor of the state bank and the first women airline pilots and coastguards.  I stood at the lectern, he told me, hands shaking and knees knocking, so short I 
could barely see over the top and so terrified the faces were a blur.  

We too were proud, but his higher profile meant we didnt see him very much.  They were both away when, ten days later, there 
was a second flood and the building again filled with mud.  Dotted around were hives of bees.  In our culture 
wedding jewellery is a bond between the couple.  Were not in a position to support a family, he told my father.  For a while my father did this but stopped 
when he realised that although a falcon flies high it is a cruel bird.  The Taliban were known to listen at peoples doors then force their way in, 
take the TVs and smash them to pieces on the street.  My father was always talking on his 
mobile so I loved to copy him and pretend to make calls on mine.  

At night I would pray, God, give me Sanjus pencil.  

Giving places to poor children didnt just mean my father lost their fees.  Holy men from a spiritual place called Derai Saydan used to 
travel the villages in those days begging for flour.  He was a mesmerising speaker.  Like most people in Swat we 
are from the Yousafzai tribe.  He even 
announced we would have female guards at Jinnahs tomb in Karachi.  My father broke the seal on the wooden storage box of maize and filled their 
bowls.  All the 
buildings around us seemed to be shaking and the rumbling didnt stop.  

Why dont you come and live with us? asked Nasir Pacha.  He knew if she had been alive, she would have been on his side.  There were no toilets and the pupils went to the fields to answer the call of 
nature.  Student politics was all about debating and 
charisma, but party politics required money.  
Finally we got news from a cousin.  We timed our prayers by the shadow on the mountains.  Poor people were happy to see the khans getting their comeuppance.  


Growing up in a School 



My mother started school when she was six and stopped the same term She was unusual in the 
village as she had a father and brothers who encouraged her to go to school.  They are rich and we are a poor country yet they loot and loot.  They wore black armbands to 
protest, saying the celebrations were for nothing, and were arrested.  

Fazlullah was particularly popular in remote areas where people remembered how TNSM 
volunteers had helped during the earthquake when the government was nowhere to be seen.  

Near us on our street there was a family with a girl my age called Safina and two boys similar in age 
to my brothers, Babar and Basit.  He said that if they did not implement 
it, his men would enforce it and tear them to pieces.  It was as though they wanted to remove all traces of womankind 
from public life.  He also swept the floors, whitewashed the walls and cleaned the 
bathrooms.  Thats what he 
does.  Where will 
she live? 

Its OK, replied my father.  After some time they went to visit 
some tribes in Swat to win their support so they could return to Afghanistan.  It was high for Mingora, two storeys with a big water tank on the roof.  Let him stay and we will cover for him 

Every day it seemed a new edict came.  Often he would weep as he spoke of 
his love for Islam Usually he spoke for a while, then his deputy Shah Douran came on air, a man who 
used to sell snacks from a tricycle in the bazaar.  One day while his parents were out some of them 
came to the house.  Just the day before the barber had told a journalist that the Taliban were good Muslims.  If it has three teachers, each goes in for just two days.  He was an impatient man at the best of times and would fly into a rage 
over the smallest thing like a hen going astray or a cup getting broken.  Near our home was a field scattered with mysterious ruins statues of lions on 
their haunches, broken columns, headless figures and, oddest of all, hundreds of stone umbrellas.  It was a 
big stream, too deep and fast to cross when the snows melted in summer.  

My father seemed worried and shooed us into the other room, but the house was small so we could 
hear every word.  

My father longed to be eloquent with a voice that boomed out with no stammer, and he knew my 
grandfather desperately wanted him to be a doctor, but though he was a very bright student and a 
gifted poet, he was poor at maths and science and felt he was a disappointment.  

That morning had begun like any other, though a little later than usual.  They were most likely killed, 
but as there is no proof of death, their wives cant be declared widows.  I wanted to go to Shangla with my father and the trucks but 
he told me it would be too dangerous.  My cousin quickly gave us his music cassettes to hide in our purses.  In my grandfathers Friday addresses he would talk about the poor and the 
landowners and how true Islam is against feudalism.  One of the school clerks told my father that the mufti kept 
coming into school and demanding why we girls were still using the main entrance.  There was no kitchen, no plumbing.  We dumped our backpacks in our rooms then gathered for morning assembly under the 
sky, our backs to the mountains as we stood to attention.  But 
first we need to educate our girls so they can become teachers! 

One day Sufi Mohammad proclaimed from jail that there should be no education for women even at 
girls madrasas.  Another was a girl in my class called Kausar, whose 
father embroidered clothes and shawls a trade our region is famous for.  He lives with us 
and has told his wife that she must observe purdah from us and that our wives must observe purdah 
from him, all in this small space.  But a smaller 
group believed that leadership should have stayed within the Prophets family and that Ali, his sonin 
law and cousin, should have taken over.  Be 
kind to your motherinlaw and fatherinlaw so they treat you well.  My mother was worried about me, but the Taliban had never come for a girl and I was more 
concerned they would target my father as he was always speaking out against them His close friend 
and fellow campaigner Zahid Khan had been shot in the face in August on his way to prayers and I 
knew everyone was telling my father, Take care, youll be next.  I think I am a bit of 
a disappointment to her as I am so like my father and dont bother with clothes and jewels.  

My cousins made fun of me for my city ways.  But Baba was the only grandfather I 
had as my mothers father had died before I was born and we became close.  Some of the richer parents 
took their children out of the school when they realised they were sharing classrooms with the sons 
and daughters of people who cleaned their houses or stitched their clothes.  But there was no freedom of expression, and if anyone criticised the 
wali, they could be expelled from the valley.  All the children gathered around our teachers as chicks swarm to 
a mother hen.  
These were no longer just about stopping people cutting down trees but were also about education 
and democracy.  Doctors and 
surgeons offered their services along with thousands of young volunteers.  They 
are very conservative and most of our madrasas are Deobandi.  She was then furious when she learned that my father did not get a good 
price for them.  You should 
close it.  Then that family in turn must take revenge.  

My father consoled me by telling me about the mistakes great heroes made when they were 
children.  
They saw Fazlullah as a kind of Robin Hood and believed that when Fazlullah took over he would 
give the khans land to the poor.  

On top of that, there was a stream of guests from Shangla now that my father had a place for them to 
stay.  Her nephew Fazli Hakim had to carry my father on his shoulders.  Thankfully, our supreme court stopped this.  He and Hidayatullah hardly had money to pay for food, let 
alone bribes.  

My friends at school said their mothers listened to the Radio Mullah although our headmistress 
Madam Maryam told us not to.  My 



grandfather had a cousin who also joined his school as a teacher.  My father 
was happy to be able to repay his kindness.  However, my father and his friends said there was nothing to 
celebrate as Swat had only suffered since it had merged with Pakistan.  Landslides blocked access to the worst affected 
parts and all the phones and power lines were down.  They borrowed 30,000 rupees 
more to repaint the building, rented a shack across the road to live in and went from door to door 
trying to find students.  Sometimes I would mimic the teachers.  

Its not that passing books on is a bad practice, he says.  It didnt 
even have its own building.  



Is he right, Aba? I asked my father.  

My father and his friends were worried and called together local elders and leaders for a peace 
conference.  We raced around, building snowmen and snow bears and trying to catch 



snowflakes.  
The most important jobs in the army, bureaucracy and government are all taken by Punjabis because 
they come from the biggest and most powerful province.  If he drew a vegetable or a 
policeman, the vegetable or policeman would magically appear.  He told me that Mahatma Gandhi said, Freedom is not worth having if it does not include 
the freedom to make mistakes.  

In the first year of the Taliban I had two operations, one to take out my appendix and the other to 
remove my tonsils.  

Fazlullahs men patrolled the streets looking for offenders against his decrees just like the Taliban 
morality police we had heard about in Afghanistan.  Thats what they did in Waziristan when they went after kidnappers and bandits.  Monibas speech was written by one of her older 
brothers.  He is just fooling people.  In those days jihadi groups were free to do 
whatever they wanted.  It was as if under Zia jihad had become the 
sixth pillar of our religion on top of the five we grow up to learn the belief in one God, namaz or 
prayers five times a day, giving zakat or alms, roza fasting from dawn till sunset during the month 
of Ramadan and haj, the pilgrimage to Mecca, which every ablebodied Muslim should do once in 
their lifetime.  My mother and I stayed in the womens quarters downstairs.  If I 
can help support one or two chil.  
Sometimes Fazlullah appeared galloping in on a black horse.  The anger wasnt just in Pakistan.  

Mr Khan, my father said to him, you know what happened to the people of Afghanistan.  My brothers liked 
it if we got one with F16 fighter jets or nuclear missiles, though my father said if our politicians 
hadnt spent so much money on building an atomic bomb we might have had enough for schools.  Our aunts scared us with ghost stories, like the one about Shalgwatay, 
the twenty fingered man, who they warned would sleep in our beds.  The beautiful trees on our hills and mountains were being chopped down for 
timber.  If people volunteered in the same way to construct schools or roads 
or even clear the river of plastic wrappers, by God, Pakistan would become a paradise within a 
year, he said.  

The school had expanded a lot by then and had three buildings the original one in Landikas was a 
primary school, and then there was a high school for girls on Yahya Street and one for boys with a big 
garden of roses near the remains of the Buddhist temple.  

The mullah clearly wasnt happy as he wanted the school closed altogether.  So one of 
my fathers nephews would have to go along.  Their first child, born in 1995, was a girl and 
stillborn.  Her dream was to be a fashion designer 



although she knew her family would never agree to it, so she told everyone she wanted to be a doctor.  

We always went to the village for the Eid holidays.  We Yousafzai (which some people spell Yusufzai or Yousufzai) are 
originally from Kandahar and are one of the biggest Pashtun tribes, spread across Pakistan and 
Afghanistan.  Hes a great scholar.  People 
often call Swat the Switzerland of the East we even had Pakistans first ski resort.  

Whenever he saw me he would greet me with a song as he was still concerned about the sad 
meaning of my name and wanted to lend some happiness to it: L Malala Maiwand wala da.  He would go crying to my mother and I would go to my father.  He said it felt like a wall came down in his throat. / You kill one and the others wont come.  My mother enjoyed these stories, but my father was horrified.  Shame 
is a very terrible thing for a Pashtun man.  

In 2004, after resisting pressure from Washington for more than two and a half years, General 
Musharraf sent the army into the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), seven agencies that 
lie along the border with Afghanistan, where the government had little control.  Nearby there were boys fishing in the pile for 
metal using magnets on strings.  

However in our Pashtun homeland of the North West Frontier Province things were very different.  
Three children is a small family by Swati standards, where most people have seven or eight.  Was she not a 
woman and a good woman at that? 

No, said the mullah.  My father often spoke of the kindness of Akbar Khan and Nasir Pacha to illustrate 
that if you help someone in need you might also receive unexpected aid.  It was unusual for 
women to have a special place to meet outside the home.  

On 17 June 2004 an unmanned Predator dropped a Hellfire missile on Nek Mohammad in South 
Waziristan apparently while he was giving an interview by satellite phone.  We knew many victims of feuds.  

My father tried to change his mind.  He watched the girls going in and out of our school every 
day and became angry, particularly as some of the girls were teenagers.  Pakistan doesnt have student loans and he had never even set foot in a bank.  Before then mullahs had almost been figures of fun my father said at wedding parties 
they would just hang around in a corner and leave early but under Zia they became influential and 
were called to Islamabad for guidance on sermons.  Allah.  How many teachers do you have? Three! Your teachers are not trained.  Local people had no idea what it was back then we did not know that the 
Americans could do such a thing.  

Now, every morning when I open my eyes, I long to see my old room full of my things, my clothes 
all over the floor and my school prizes on the shelves.  My father and his friends were disgusted.  In our house my mother managed everything because my father was so busy.  The plan was to get his 
school going then, once it was successful, send for his wife.  All we could see was a little stamp of open sky out of the back and 
glimpses of the sun, at that time of day a yellow orb floating in the dust that streamed over everything.  

Aba, you must give them free places at your school, I begged.  Wearing a burqa is like walking inside big fabric shuttlecock 
with only a grille to see through and on hot days its like an oven.  The women of Spal Bandi had a beautiful spot on top of the 
mountain where only they could congregate to chat about their everyday lives.  But I was more concerned with matters closer to home our own street to 
be exact.  We found our mother sitting in a chair 
holding the Quran, reciting verses over and over.  Just as the Russian invasion of Afghanistan had changed 
everything for General Zia, so 9/11 transformed General Musharraf from an international outcast.  Some of the female staff like Miss Ulfat would pick 
me up and put me on their lap as if I was their pet or even take me home with them for a while.  My mother said it was hard for the 
poor children to learn when they were not getting enough food at home so some of the girls would 
come to our house for breakfast.  The most beautiful girl was Tanzela, and we often gave her to the other group so we could 
then have her as our bride.  

Usually politicians only visited during election time, promising roads, electricity, clean water and 
schools and giving money and generators to influential local people we called stakeholders, who 
would instruct their communities on how to vote.  
What you did was wrong, Malala, she said.  You must meet Maulana Fazlullah, people told him.  But we werent exactly cooperating as the ISI was still 
arming Taliban fighters and giving their leaders sanctuary in Quetta.  It was a journey of just five minutes 
along the stinky stream, past the giant billboard for Dr Humayuns Hair Transplant Institute where we 
joked that one of our bald male teachers must have gone when he suddenly started to sprout hair.  The competition was always between me and my best friend Moniba, 
who had beautiful writing and presentation, which the examiners liked, but I knew I could beat her on 
content.  As he waited outside the headmasters office, he broke out into a 
sweat, and once inside his stutter was worse than ever.  The most 
violent took place in Islamabad on 12 February 1989, when American flags were set alight in front of 
the American Centre even though Rushdie and his publishers were British.  My grandfather would not buy enough gold so my father had to borrow 
more money to buy bangles.  

School wasnt the only thing my aunts missed out on.  

I played mostly with Khushal because he was just two years younger than me, but we fought all the 
time.  

The MMA government banned CD and DVD shops and wanted to create a morality police like the 
Afghan Taliban had set up.  There would be bowls of chicken, rice, local spinach and spicy mutton, all cooked over the fire 
by the women, followed by plates of crunchy apples, slices of yellow cake and a big kettle of milky 
tea.  My father felt he had lost his chance and 
would end up like his brother teaching in a local school.  He was right.  

Under Zias regime life for women in Pakistan became much more restricted.  When he was at college and had no money for food or 
books many of his friends helped him out and he never forgot that.  No, he replied.  
Though Afghans are renowned fighters, Colonel Imam, the officer heading the programme, 
complained that trying to organise them was like weighing frogs.  My father was against khanism but he said 
the Taliban were worse.  He said 
people should stop using heroin, and chars, which is our word for hashish.  When my grandparents came home they were furious and beat him.  In my country too many politicians think nothing 
of stealing.  His execution shocked everybody and made Pakistan look bad all around the world.  

Almonds are good, he said.  Every night my father would pray to God, O Allah, please make war 
between Muslims and infidels so I can die in your service and be a martyr.  What we knew and they didnt was that 
the mufti s own niece attended the school in secret.  

I was ten when the Taliban came to our valley.  Some were in the newspapers, some were notes or messages passed on by 
people.  

In Pakistan we were still under a dictatorship, but America needed our help, just as it had in the 
1980s to fight the Russians in Afghanistan.  He was from a wealthy khan family and the local 
vice president of the ANP.  We called them chaqwartee.  How 
can you? Rohul Amin asked, laughing.  We used the Pakistani rupee, but the government of Pakistan could only intervene on 
foreign policy.  My father would say to her, Pekai, purdah is not only in the veil, purdah is in the heart.  Every village had to take turns sending their men for a day to 
help build it.  They had been locked in a feud for so long no one 
even seemed to remember how it had started probably some small slight as we are a hotheaded 
people.  

No, I have to do this, said Nawab Ali.  The year before I was born a group called the Taliban led by a oneeyed mullah had 
taken over the country and was burning girls schools.  Also the building was on the banks of a river 
where people threw their rubbish and it smelt foul in hot weather.  Instead he would tell his best 
students to keep their old books for my father at the end of the year and then he would be sent to their 
homes to get them.  
In the town of Muzaffarabad in Azad Kashmir the JuD even set up a large field hospital with Xray 
machines, an operating theatre, a wellstocked pharmacy and a dental department.  
He began speaking against school administrators and congratulating girls by name who left school.  And my 
ankles click when I walk, which makes adults squirm.  He went there by bus, and it seemed so big 
to him compared to his home village that he thought hed arrived in a city.  

Everything changed when my father was ten.  Let them be illiterate.  He liked the hilly people and respected their tough lives.  Just as we say, Mm hakim khatrai jan Half a doctor is a danger to 
ones life, so, Mm mullah khatrai iman A mullah who is not fully learned is a danger to 
faith, he said.  One of my male cousins was angry and asked my father, Why 
isnt she covered? He replied, Shes my daughter.  

Then there were more attacks.  I kept seeing the dirty face of the girl from the dump and 
continued to pester my father to give them places at our school.  In the 1950s he ended the system where 
people paid taxes to the khans.  In Malalai we 
Pashtuns have our very own Joan of Arc.  The bus was actually what we call a dyna, a 
white Toyota TownAce truck with three parallel benches, one along either side and one in the middle.  Our home was always full of people 
visiting from the village.  For as long as my father could remember it had been 
his dream to open a school, but with no family contacts or money it was extremely hard for him to 
realise this dream He thought there was nothing more important than knowledge.  There was a beautiful fifteenyearold girl called Seema.  A few months later came the first attack on Pakistan by a US drone.  He told people the correct 
way to do their ablutions for prayers which body part to wash first.  It was a long journey by bus, then an hours walk up the hill to where he 
lived.  

We were only a hundred miles from Pakistans capital Islamabad as the crow flies but it felt as if it 
was in another country.  On Fridays the brothers would creep into the mosque and watch in 
wonder as my grandfather stood in the pulpit and preached to the congregation for an hour or so, 
waiting for the moment when his voice would rise and practically shake the rafters.  

My father went to see the building after work. ) They have very few hospitals and 
schools, particularly for girls, and political parties were not allowed there until recently.  

Our street could not be reached by car, so coming home I would get off the bus on the road below 
by the stream and go through a barred iron gate and up a flight of steps.  Soon it became a compulsion.  It was only 
when he met my mother that he became comfortable in his own skin.  I was born in 
summer, which was perhaps why it was my favourite time of year, even though in Mingora summer 
was hot and dry and the stream stank where people dumped their garbage.  Influential people in remote areas took money from 



the government for schools which never saw a single pupil.  Cases such 
as land disputes, common in our area, which used to be resolved quickly now took ten years to come 
to court.  
Suddenly he was being invited to the White House by George W.  I am sorry but I cant help you.  He even asks his 
wife! they say as an insult.  I preferred staying in Karshat 
with my cousins on my maternal side because they had a concrete house with a bathroom and there 
were lots of children to play with.  Next door to us the Shah of Iran had been overthrown in a revolution a few months 
earlier so the CIA had lost their main base in the region.  My father wrote my speech.  The 
treatment did not cure the stutter.  Look after your own affairs.  But the elders were 
happy with this compromise and they left.  

I liked to sit on the roof and watch the mountains and dream.  Like my father Ive always been a daydreamer, and sometimes in lessons 
my mind would drift and Id imagine that on the way home a terrorist might jump out and shoot me on 
those steps.  Who would dare kick me out of this area? 

My father came home frustrated.  Who are you? You are crazy! You 
need to go to a doctor.  We knew what it was like to be hungry so my mother always 
cooked extra and gave food to poor families.  He explained that 
the children would sell what they had sorted to a garbage shop for a few rupees.  The owner had called it that 
because he had once been to Turkey and seen a Ramada Hotel! But the school had gone bankrupt, 
which perhaps should have made them think twice.  It was clear the 
superintendent wanted money.  His sisters my aunts did not go to school at all, just like 
millions of girls in my country.  It started a massive 
programme to train Afghan refugees recruited from the camps as resistance fighters or mujahideen.  The Swati people fled 
up the mountain, believing they would be protected by their gods because it was so high.  

If you look at a map of Swat youll see it is one long valley with little valleys we call darae off to the 
sides like the branches of a tree.  She was the only girl in a 
class of boys.  
Her father said nothing.  On some 
mosques they set up speakers connected to radios so his broadcasts could be heard by everyone in the 
village and in the fields.  

Malala was a lucky girl, says Hidayatullah.  They are forgotten places of harsh rocky valleys where people scrape by on smuggling.  I had a thirtyyearold problem and its been resolved in one go, one man 



told my father.  So when we did the endofyear exams and MalkaeNoor came first, I was shocked.  All 
those things she did.  One of my fathers friends told him he had seen three men publicly flogged 
after the shura had found them guilty of involvement in the abduction of two women.  Then he helped them save their fridge.  My father, who only has a moustache, insisted he would not grow a 
beard for the Taliban.  At 
home I cried and cried and had to be comforted by my mother.  One day it disappeared.  In olden times Swat was called Uddyana, which means garden.  It seemed to us that these bureaucrats came to our 
province simply to get rich, then went back home.  

Having so many people around made it hard to study.  The idea was they would be able to stop a woman accompanied by a man 
and require her to prove that the man was her relative.  Blackskinned people 
are often called white and short people tall.  When Sufi 
Mohammad was imprisoned in a roundup of militant leaders in 2002, Fazlullah had taken over the 
movements leadership.  

The other main student organisation was Islami JamaateTalaba, the student wing of the religious 
party JamaateIslami, which was powerful in many universities in Pakistan.  Our own 
founder, Jinnah, was a Shia, and Benazir Bhuttos mother was also a Shia from Iran.  It is 
officially banned but still continues.  Turning to the group, he said, When this 
gentleman passes me on the street, I look to him and greet him but he doesnt answer, he just bows his 
head.  

It was around the time he was praying to go to heaven as a martyr that he met my mothers brother, 
Faiz Mohammad, and started mixing with her family and going to her fathers hujra.  

It was in Spal Bandi that my father came across women who had great freedom and were not 
hidden away as in his own village.  It 
was almost as if they thought Fazlullah would recreate our old princely state from the time of the 
wali.  They even persuaded the 
Americans to let them fly hundreds of Pakistani fighters out of northern Afghanistan.  

My fathers friend Hidayatullah had become a government official in Peshawar and warned us, 



This is how these militants work.  My mind transports 
me back to my school and there I am reunited with my friends and teachers.  

My mother comes from a family of strong women as well as influential men.  From there they were running 
training camps and launching raids across the border on NATO troops.  His voice did not boom like his fathers, but his 
passion shone through and as he went on he gained confidence.  The goldsmith kept coming and demanding his money for my mothers 
wedding bangles.  I had been delighted to have my own room, 
and my father had even bought me a dressing table to work on.  Most 
Pashtun men never do this, as sharing problems with women is seen as weak.  Instead he built forts on mountains all 
across Swat and created an army.  One 
day he called my father excitedly to say hed found the ideal place.  My mother had been waiting for a son 
and could not hide her joy when he was born.  

One afternoon I came home from school and rushed into the kitchen as usual for a snack.  Can 
you help to get him off our backs? 

Im afraid I cant help you, Ziauddin, he replied.  He even told people how they 
should wash their private parts.  So when my father was 
thirteen and told my grandfather he was entering a public speaking competition he was stunned.  A small boy was 
brought to sit on their laps to encourage the birth of a son.  The few concrete houses had 
been built by families whose sons or fathers had gone south to work in the mines or to the Gulf, from 
where they sent money home.  Baba had beautiful handwriting 
and my father would spend hours painstakingly drawing letters but Baba never once praised him.  He ended it with Lincolns words: it is 
far more honourable to fail than to cheat .  He found himself torn between the two 
extremes, secularism and socialism on one side and militant Islam on the other.  When he was a child he thought this small valley 
was the entire world and that if anyone went beyond the point where either mountain kissed the sky, 
they would fall off.  

My mother is very pious and prays five times a day, though not in the mosque as that is only for the 
men.  Though Hidayatullah and my father were not speaking at that time, Hidayatullah missed 
me so much he used to visit me.  He felt ashamed but had no choice if he didnt want to end up illiterate.  

After that my father entered every competition in the district.  Our wives are like sisters to him and his is like a sister to us, but 
this madman has made our house a hell.  Best of all, as he went up to collect the 
cup for first prize, he saw his father clapping and enjoying being patted on the back by those standing 
around him.  

Around that time we moved away from where we had been living on the same street as Moniba to 
an area where I didnt have any friends.  He taught theology in the government high school in 
the village of Shahpur.  Our house was one storey and proper concrete.  In my fathers small village eight people had been killed and 
many homes destroyed.  He described what was happening in Afghanistan as a war 
between two elephants the US and the Soviet Union not our war, and said that we Pashtuns were 
like the grass crushed by the hooves of two fierce beasts.  It was always a race between us and the birds to get to them.  I see my parents happy and laughing a lot.  

My father comes from a large family.  Musharraf built a 
mansion by Rawal Lake in Islamabad and bought an apartment in London. One year ago I left my home for school and never returned.  They are schoolchildren.  Water was carried from the spring.  At the time 
General Musharraf was on a plane of our national airline PIA coming back from Sri Lanka.  Many never came back.  

Young love! she shouted.  Each khan kept hundreds of armed men both for 
feuds and to raid and loot other villages.  They thought it was 
shameful for their children to mix with those from poor families.  It would be better to plead, OK, 
shoot me, but first listen to me.  

Wherever we lived my mother filled our house with people.  
People began going to Fazlullah and his men to resolve grievances about anything from business 
matters to personal feuds.  



Sometimes we went up to the mountains and sometimes down to the river on family trips.  On our left was the tomb of Sher Mohammad 
Khan, the finance minister of the first ruler of Swat, all overgrown with grass, and on our right the 
snack factory.  My own grandfather 
narrowly escaped death in the riots when his train was attacked by Hindus on his way home from 
Delhi, where he had been studying.  I remembered what my father had said about taking a deep breath before starting, but then I 
saw that all eyes were on me and I rushed through.  The Americans were quick as they had thousands of troops and hundreds 
of helicopters in Afghanistan so could easily fly in supplies and show they were helping us in our 
hour of need, though some crews covered the American markings on their helicopters, fearing attack.  I am a khan.  One of them was to a boy whose father, Sharafat Ali, had helped my father when he was a 
penniless college student.  

This family rivalry meant that my father was bullied a lot by his cousins.  Now we are a country of 180 million and more than 96 per cent 
are Muslim We also have around two million Christians and more than two million Ahmadis, who 
say they are Muslims though our government says they are not.  
In January 2007 a close friend of one of my fathers friends was kidnapped in his village by eighty 
masked gunmen.  But my country is centuries 
behind this one.  

It was only when she met my father that she felt regret.  On each side of the family he had an uncle with the same affliction.  The 
jirga decided that the widowers family should be punished by handing over their most beautiful girl 
to be married to the least eligible man of the rival clan.  My fathers elder 
brother Saeed Ramzan had worked for years as a teacher at a local school.  They 
said the Americans always preferred dealing with dictators in Pakistan.  A stutter was a terrible thing for a man who so loved words and 
poetry.  She was always out helping people.  But the second time they will steal 
something bigger and the third something bigger still.  As we skipped 
through, we cast off our head scarves like winds puffing away clouds to make way for the sun then 
ran helterskelter up the steps.  Unfortunately, the maliks make little difference.  The ISI chief 
asked the Americans to hold off their attack on Afghanistan until he had gone to Kandahar to ask the 
Taliban leader Mullah Omar to hand over bin Laden; instead he offered the Taliban help.  Down on the river at the Karshat end were 
water buffaloes.  Many girls schools in Afghanistan are named after her.  
All Pashtun children grow up with the story of how Malalai inspired the Afghan army to defeat the 
British in 1880 in one of the biggest battles of the Second Anglo Afghan War.  There 
was even a headmaster from Shangla who would boast that his greatest success was to send ten boys 
in Grade 9 for jihad training in Kashmir.  Not a 
single lie nor a single penny, not even the coins my father leaves around the house, which were 
allowed to buy snacks with.  It is a very beautiful letter, full of good advice.  If you do not fall in the battle of Maiwand then, by God, someone is 
saving you as a symbol of shame.  What you are doing is wrong.  

The village was a forgotten place.  I thought back to the 
children working on the rubbish heap.  Before the troubles came, most people, like my mother, had 
never been outside Swat.  The shack had just two rooms, one where Hidayatullah and my father 
slept and one which was a small office.  He was so 
angry that he made the daylong bus journey to Mingora to see the Swat minister of education.  Our own intelligence service, ISI, had virtually 
created the Taliban.  

The Village 

In our tradition on the seventh day of a childs life we have a celebration called Woma (which 
means seventh) for family, friends and neighbours to come and admire the newborn.  Over and over she 
pounded.  Across 
the tribal areas people were angry and many joined militant groups or formed lashkars, local militias.  It was my grandmothers 
faith in my father that gave him the courage to find his own proud path he could travel along.  

Your prime responsibility is to teach the students, replied my father.  There was really only one subject 9/11.  The Muttahida Majlis eAmal (MMA) alliance was 
a group of five religious parties including the Jamiat UlemaeIslam (JUI), which ran the madrasas 
where the Taliban were trained.  The same will happen to 
us, mark my words, and we will have no shelter, no place to migrate to.  For many 
couples in arranged marriages this is the first time they see each others faces.  
When a villager complained to her that he was flirting with a girl living across the road, she defended 
him.  My father would make him good tea and offer him biscuits in the hope that would 
keep him satisfied.  But President Bush kept praising Musharraf, 
inviting him to Washington and calling him his buddy.  Our provincial government was still made up of mullah parties 
who wouldnt criticise anyone who claimed to be fighting for Islam.  

As the day went on and the sun climbed higher in the sky, more and more of the White Mountain 
would be bathed in golden sun.  Hundreds of CD and DVD shops closed voluntarily and their owners were 
paid compensation by the Taliban.  These clerics said 9/11 was 
revenge on the Americans for what they had been doing to other people round the world, but they 
ignored the fact that the people in the World Trade Center were innocent and had nothing to do with 



American policy and that the Holy Quran clearly says it is wrong to kill.  Few spoke out.  I was a girl in a land where 
rifles are fired in celebration of a son, while daughters are hidden away behind a curtain, their role in 
life simply to prepare food and give birth to children.  Many ISI officers were close to its leaders, having known them for years, and 
shared some of their beliefs.  They were friends from the village.  Sometimes I sat on the roof too, watching the smoke rise from 
the cooking fires all around and listening to the nightly racket of the crickets.  Pa tool 
jehan ke da khushala da, he sang.  She was forty, fifteen years older than him, and she had been 
married before, yet he still married her.  Villages were 
ruled by khans, and the common people, craftsmen and labourers, were their tenants.  Sometimes though she would be out because 
she was shopping for clothes in the Cheena Bazaar, and that would be a different matter.  The village 
received no electricity from the government so many villagers got their power from these makeshift 
hydroelectric projects.  It was too narrow even for a cricket pitch and only 
one family had a television.  He was smiling.  My father tells me even before I could talk I would 
toddle into classes and talk as if I was a teacher.  Sir, dont 
do this, they pleaded.  We would sit on the 
floor around a long plastic sheet which my mother laid with food, and eat with our right hand as is our 
custom, balling together rice and meat.  He was 
actually getting married, but he didnt tell any of his friends in Mingora as he could not afford to 
entertain them.  Sinful acts like these had caused the earthquake, Fazlullah thundered, 
and if people didnt stop they would again invite the wrath of God.  I used to sit in wonder, listening 
to everything they were being taught.  The governor of our province issued a statement 
that anyone who wanted to fight in Afghanistan against NATO forces was free to do so.  It broadcast every night from eight to ten and again in the 
morning from seven to nine.  

It took a while for us to realise how bad it was.  There 
were seven people some other senior Tablighis, a mosque keeper, a former jihadi and a shopkeeper 
 and they filled our small house.  

We have a custom called swara by which a girl can be given to another tribe to resolve a feud.  But it was almost certainly 
made worse by his father, whose own voice was a soaring instrument that could make words thunder 
and dance.  My 
father didnt have any money for the hospital or for a midwife so a neighbour helped at my birth.  I am staying here.  They helped 
clear and rebuild destroyed villages as well as leading prayers and burying bodies.  One of them was the house of the local cleric, Maulana Khadim, which fell 
down crushing his four beautiful daughters.  No Pashtun leaves his land of his own sweet will, she would say.  
The Americans said it was the alQaeda training camp which had featured in the groups videos and 
that the hill was riddled with tunnels and gun emplacements.  

The day when everything changed was Tuesday, 9 October 2012.  Outside his office my father had a framed copy of a letter written by Abraham 
Lincoln to his sons teacher, translated into Pashto.  We are supposed to be collecting money in enrolment 
fees.  A famous poem was written at that time by Rahmat Shah Sayel, the same Peshawar poet who 
wrote the poem about my namesake.  To be torn from the country that you love is not something to wish on anyone.  The 
Americans had already suspended most aid the year before when we conducted nuclear tests, but now 
almost everyone boycotted us.  The local commander, General 



Iftikhar, stormed the control tower at Karachi so that Musharraf s plane could land.  We have a saying, Without honour, the world counts for 
nothing We fight and feud among ourselves so much that our word for cousin tarbur is the same 
as our word for enemy.  I shivered when he told me such things.  
Vast camps of white tents sprang up mostly around Peshawar, some of which are still there today.  Then, nearly five years later, another boy was 
born Atal, brighteyed and inquisitive like a squirrel.  
Their home was in Spal Bandi, a beautiful mountain village on the way to the White Palace, and my 
father describes it as a romantic and inspirational place.  I promised 
myself Id never do such a thing again.  The most popular part of his show came every evening when he would read 
out peoples names.  When my brothers came along and Baba 
wanted to pay, my father refused as he hadnt done this for me.  

They are scared of the pen, he replied.  She was a pampered girl who had lots of dolls 
and a shoebox full of jewellery.  Girls should not be going to school, he continued.  It was a girl about my age.  All of that stopped.  

In our province Maulana Sufi Mohammad, who had fought in Afghanistan against the Russians, 
issued a fatwa against the US.  Even my grandfather went.  It was the ground floor of a two 
storey building in a welloff area called Landikas with a walled courtyard where students could 
gather.  

I had started taking the bus because my mother was scared of me walking on my own.  One of the agencies, Bajaur, is next to Swat.  However, life 
wasnt quite what she expected.  T bought it in the bazaar, she said.  

I had been born into a sort of democracy in which for ten years Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif 
kept replacing each other, none of their governments ever completing a term and always accusing 
each other of corruption.  
So when a new girl named MalkaeNoor joined our class, I didnt think anything of it.  

But she knew I had.  We had been 
getting threats all year.  Only Shahpur had a clinic, and if anyone fell ill in the other villages they had to be 
carried there by their relatives on a wooden frame which we jokingly called the Shangla Ambulance.  I never said those things to your clerk.  Neither 
man could get any money from their families, and Hidayatullah was not pleased to discover that my 
father was still in debt to lots of people from college, so they were always receiving letters 
demanding money.  None of the children had toys or books.  Its in the Kana 
dara, which is enclosed by craggy mountain walls and so narrow there is not even room for a cricket 
ground.  Then we crammed in, fighting over the window seats even though the panes 
were so encrusted with dirt it was hard to see out of them The sides of Swat buses are painted with 
scenes of bright pink and yellow flowers, neonorange tigers and snowy mountains.  Baba was such a 
popular and passionate speaker that he could have been a great leader if he had been more diplomatic 
and less consumed by rivalries with cousins and others who were better off.  The pencil was never there, but I knew who I would help first.  You could see the 
White Mountain from everywhere, and my father told me he used to think of it as a symbol of peace 
for our land, a white flag at the end of our valley.  Thats how we think of each other.  They dont think 
power is in the hands of the woman who takes care of everyone all day long, and gives birth to their 
children.  Am I in an office or am I in a 
police station or a court? Am I a criminal? He decided to challenge the officials to protect other 
school owners from such bullying and corruption.  They had jogging shoes or 
cheap plastic sandals on their feet, and sometimes stockings over their heads with holes for their eyes, 
and they blew their noses dirtily into the ends of their turbans.  

We lived in the shadow of the Hindu Kush mountains, where the men went to shoot ibex and golden 
cockerels.  My father remembers that one 
day a maulana called Sufi Mohammad came to the village and asked young men to join him to fight 
the Russians in the name of Islam.  Everyone wanted me in their family as I was from Mingora and 
modern.  

Our valley is full of fruit trees on which grow the sweetest figs and pomegranates and peaches, and 
in our garden we had grapes, guavas and persimmons.  Neither the students nor the teachers were supposed to have their own opinions, and 
the owners control was so tight they even frowned upon friendship between teachers.  My father says that in our part of the world this idea of jihad was very much 
encouraged by the CIA.  Our founder Jinnah wanted the rights of 
Muslims in India to be recognised, but the majority of people in India were Hindu.  They became known as Shias, shortened from ShiatAli, the 
Party of Ali.  

That afternoon, when my father came home from school, I told him about the scavenger children 
and begged him to go with me to look.  

A few days later I saw Safina playing with a phone exactly the same as mine.  They lavished praise on him 

Prime Minister Zulfikar Bhutto had appointed Zia as his army chief because he thought he was not 
very intelligent and would not be a threat.  
Everyone knew she was in love with a boy, and sometimes he would pass by and she would look at 
him from under her long dark lashes, which all the girls envied.  My father was known 
in the family as Khaista dada, which means beautiful.  If someone can show any example in history where Islam allows a female madrasa, 
they can come and piss on my beard, he said.  The birds 
loved that tree.  

Their original plan was to open a school in my fathers village of Shahpur, where there was a 
desperate need: Like a shop in a community where there are no shops, he said.  I dreamed of going to the top of Mount Elum like Alexander the Great to touch Jupiter and even 
beyond the valley.  He told us that the last part of the journey had 
been very difficult.  
Sometimes a plywood coffin would be brought back from one of the mines.  Pisho, she would call.  We live as we have for centuries by a 
code called Pashtunwali, which obliges us to give hospitality to all guests and in which the most 
important value is nang or honour.  Our history textbooks were rewritten to describe Pakistan as a 
fortress of Islam, which made it seem as if we had existed far longer than since 1947, and 
denounced Hindus and Jews.  Id heard you were an infidel, he said to my father, but there 
are Qurans in your room 

Of course there are! replied my father, astonished that his faith would be questioned.  In our society for a girl to flirt with 
any man brings shame on the family, though its all right for the man.  Nawaz Sharif was prime minister at 
the time and had fallen out with his army chief General Pervez Musharraf and sacked him.  The holy man was called 
Lewano Pir, Saint of the Mad, because he was said to be able to calm lunatics.  But some of the 



family thought people would gossip about us and say we were not properly following Pashtunwali.  We have many strands of Islam in Pakistan.  Almonds are very costly.  

The school was not far from my home and I used to walk, but since the start of last year I had been 
going with other girls in a rickshaw and coming home by bus.  

Women in the village hid their faces whenever they left their purdah quarters and could not meet or 
speak to men who were not their close relatives.  They 
described the roar of rocks sliding down hills and everyone running out of their houses reciting the 
Quran, the screams as roofs crashed down and the howls of the buffaloes and goats.  I had been caught.  The boy was a goodfornothing, so poor that 
the girls father had to pay all their expenses.  Safina is younger than you and you should have taught her better, she 
said.  

My Father the Falcon 



I always knew my father had trouble with words.  It seemed very far away.  

I started crying and apologised over and over again.  

Our people say it is a good system, and our crime rate is much lower than in nonPashtun areas.  It wasnt the best of days to start 
with as it was the middle of school exams, though as a bookish girl I didnt mind them as much as 
some of my classmates.  
He did something which our democratic rulers hadnt, even Benazir, and abolished the law that for a 
woman to prove she was raped, she had to produce four male witnesses.  Yet my mother still believed it was written in the Quran 
that women should not go out and women should not talk to men other than relatives they cannot 
marry.  

My fathers high school opened in 2003.  Yet, he brought with him a vast family tree of our clan, the Dalokhel Yousafzai, going right 
back to my great great grandfather and showing only the male line.  To me he seemed very thin and small, like a reed that 
could snap in the wind, but he was the apple of her eye, her ladla.  The school was doing well, and my father was building an 
impressive reception with an arched entrance in the boys high school.  We did not 
know then that Musharraf was also letting the Americans use our airfields.  

Their leader was Maulana Fazlullah, a 28yearold who used to operate the pulley chair to cross 
the Swat River and whose right leg dragged because of childhood polio.  As darkness fell we sat by the light of oil lamps, batting away 
the flies as our silhouettes made dancing shadows on the walls.  They did not tell their pupils as they wanted people to think the school was expanding and had 
two buildings.  Hed 
boast, Ziauddin is a shaheen  a falcon because this is a creature that flies high above other birds.  Moniba sets down rules which I try to follow.  

Naeem and my father invested their entire savings of 60,000 rupees.  My father always says, While Badshah Sahib brought peace, his son brought 
prosperity.  There are still many pictures of 
him around.  The shop would then 
sell it on at a profit.  What had I done? I was very sad and went to my room 
When I opened my cupboard, I saw that all the things I had taken were gone.  Of 
course my father detested doing this.  Predictably the local 
people saw it as an attack on their way of life.  I could 
listen endlessly to the story of how they met.  
Suddenly the school owners were in a position of power.  He said they 
had told him, Either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists, and threatened to bomb us back 
to the Stone Age if we stood against them.  After the wedding my mother moved in with my grandfather and my 
uncle.  If you believe in God 
you will stay here.  

Spit it out, son! hed roar whenever my father got stuck in the middle of a sentence.  My father quickly got 
involved in student politics and became known as a talented speaker and debater.  Here was a man who had read so many 
books, who wrote her poems she could not read, and whose ambition was to have his own school.  I never knew my grandmother, but my father says she used to 
joke with my grandfather, By God, just as you greet us only with a frown, when I die may God give 
you a wife who never smiles.  Though she cannot read or write, my father shares everything with 
her, telling her about his day, the good and the bad.  In the same way, if 
you choose a good method to do something bad its still bad.  So he and his friends set up something called the Global Peace 
Council which, despite its name, had very local concerns.  I was so nervous before the speech, I was trembling with fear.  

In my dreams about the shooting my father is also in the bus and he is shot with me, and then there 
are men everywhere and I am searching for my father.  She teases him a lot and gives him advice about 
who she thinks is a genuine friend and who is not, and my father says she is always right.  

There was one big problem.  But they were so 
captivated by the beauty of Swat they instead decided to stay there and forced the other tribes out.  Sometimes they would get stuck and he would 
repeat the same syllable over and over like a record caught in a groove as we all waited for the next 
syllable to suddenly pop out.  But many Pashtuns did not 
like the bombing of Afghanistan or the way Pakistan was helping the Americans, even if it was only 
by allowing them to cross our airspace and stopping weapons supplies to the Taliban.  My father says that Pakistan has been cursed with more than its fair share of politicians 
who only think about money.  His beloved mother had died just before 
he graduated from school.  But eventually Baba gave him a fine speech, which my father 
practised and practised.  

We Muslims are split between Sunnis and Shias we share the same fundamental beliefs and the 
same Holy Quran but we disagree over who was the right person to lead our religion when the 
Prophet died in the seventh century.  When she was born our luck changed.  Fazlullah closed beauty parlours and banned shaving so 
there was no work for barbers.  It was very hard.  The man chosen to be the leader or caliph was Abu Bakr, a close 
friend and adviser of the Prophet and the man he chose to lead prayers as he lay on his deathbed.  
In it he argued that if you want to do good, but do it in a bad way, thats still bad.  

We couldnt see in front, but a young bearded man in lightcoloured clothes had stepped into the 
road and waved the van down.  
I loved the gloopy honey, which we ate with walnuts.  Fazlullah denounced Pakistani government officials as 
infidels and said they were opposed to bringing in sharia law.  I was the one who would help other pupils 
who had difficulties.  I was only four and too young to understand.  
Once there, all they do is keep the children quiet with a long stick as they cannot imagine education 
will be any use to them.  Ms, ps and ks 
were all enemies lying in wait.  At school we had read stories about Mohammad Ali Jinnah.  That was the start of what my father calls the 
Arabisation of Pakistan.  If the water pump 
stopped working, he would go down the well to repair it himself.  We took earrings, bangles and 
necklaces to decorate the bride, singing Bollywood songs as we worked.  Some 6,400 schools were turned to 
rubble and 18,000 children lost their lives.  My father used to grumble, Were a school not a poultry farm.  They dont care if the army is actually flying the plane, they are happy to 
stay out of the cockpit and sit in business class, close the curtains and enjoy the fine food and service 
while the rest of us are squashed in economy.  

Its like when one mixes milk with tea, I said.  

With so few students, they had little money to equip the school and soon ran out of credit.  He wanted tea all the time, our traditional tea with milk and sugar and cardamom, 
but even my mother tired of this and eventually made some so bitter that he lost the taste for it.  He 
began building a vast redbrick headquarters in Imam Deri complete with a madrasa, a mosque and 
walls and levees to protect it from the Swat River.  

When nightfall came, there were still tremors and my mother was in a state of panic.  He had studied in the 
madrasa of Maulana Sufi Mohammad, the founder of the TNSM, and married his daughter.  

My fathers college held a heated debate in a packed room.  He would endlessly 
point out to my father that life on earth was short and that there were few opportunities for young men 
in the village.  She says he didnt even notice, as he would set off early every morning after 
a breakfast of cornbread and cream, his German pistol strapped under his arm, and spend his days 
busy with local politics or resolving feuds.  You think I enter the school and take my clothes off? When you see a boy and a 
girl you see a scandal.  

Often rain would then come to wash everything clean, and the clouds would linger on the green 
terraces of the hills where people grew radishes and walnut trees.  Sometimes when I 
walked along the main road I saw chalked messages on the sides of buildings, contact us for jihad 
training, they would say, listing a phone number to call.  My father came from a backward village yet through education 
and force of personality he made a good living for us and a name for himself.  In January 2006 a drone supposedly targeting him landed 
on a village called Damadola, destroying three houses and killing eighteen people.  

So when the official angled for a bribe, my father turned on him with all the force of his years of 
debating.  

In our culture speeches are usually written by our fathers, uncles or teachers.  After this the road winds back down for a while then follows the 
Ghwurban River and peters out into a rocky track.  On Pakistans fiftieth anniversary on 14 August 1997 there were parades and 
commemorations throughout the country.  

My mother was very upset and told my father.  

I would get very depressed and sometimes collapse seeing the problems all around us, said 
Hidayatullah, but when Ziauddin is in a crisis he becomes strong and his spirits high.  
More than 73,000 people had been killed and 128,000 injured, many of them permanently disabled.  One was Sher Zaman, a man who had been in my fathers 
class and always got better grades than him.  Mingora was expanding quickly around 175,000 
people now called it home and our oncefresh air was becoming very polluted from all the vehicles 
and cooking fires.  Everyone wanted to see the back of the corrupt government officials sent into the valley.  My father complained that most people were like our local barber, who one day 
grumbled to my father that he had only eighty rupees in his till, less than a tenth of what his takings 
used to be.  

I wasnt scared but I had started making sure the gate was locked at night and asking God what 
happens when you die.  To try and boost 
their income they ran a tuck shop at school, going off in the mornings and buying snacks to sell to the 
children.  It was also not enough for him to 
save for the wedding he hoped for to his beloved Tor Pekai.  My 
father fired him, but some other teachers were worried and sent a delegation to his office.  It was as if there 
was a feud between two brothers and they agreed to live in different houses.  The journey usually took about five 
hours as long as the road had not been washed away by rains or landslides, and the Flying Coach left 
early in the morning.  My father joked that our home had become a boarding house.  Every few years Pakistan sent us a new deputy commissioner, or DC, to govern 
Swat, just as the British had done in colonial days.  The leader of LeT is a fiery professor 
from Lahore called Hafiz Saeed, who is often on television calling on people to attack India.  It was always our 
mother who shopped for our clothes and took us to hospital if we were ill, even though in our culture, 
particularly for those of us from villages, a woman is not supposed to do these things alone.  We dont have secrets from each other 
and we dont share our secrets with anyone else.  This is 
the path that he would later show me.  The Marghazar stream loops through it, milky brown from the plastic bags 
and rubbish thrown into it.  General Zia had promised to be in power for ninety days and had 
stayed more than eleven years until he was killed in an air crash.  There are two powers 
in the world; one is the sword and the other is the pen.  

But no one would listen.  General Zia was invited to meet 
President Ronald Reagan at the White House and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher at 10 Downing 
Street.  It was easy.  His body was found dumped in his familys ancestral graveyard.  When his 
headmasters wife fell ill, my father donated blood to help save her.  She 
wanted to buy a new cradle for him when I was born my father couldnt afford one so they used an 
old wooden one from the neighbours which was already third or fourth hand but my father refused.  Sharif was accused of treason and only saved by his friends in the 
Saudi royal family, who arranged his exile.  When Sorayas family found out about the union they were furious.  It was a nightmare for someone trying to start a 
business and it drove Naeem to distraction.  Its hard to imagine that anyone 
would see that as a threat.  

I think everyone makes a mistake at least once in their life.  Maybe Id take off my shoes and hit him, but then Id think if 
I did that there would be no difference between me and a terrorist.  By far the biggest group is the Barelvis, who are named after a nineteenthcentury madrasa in 
Bareilly, which lies in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh.  We children were cross too.  The dates of the feasts are announced by a 
special panel of clerics who watch for the appearance of the crescent moon.  In our 
culture we all have nicknames aside from Pisho, which my mother had called me since I was a 
baby, some of my cousins called me Lachi, which is Pashto for cardamom.  

And me, her beauty, he laughs.  Some of the teachers were antiFazlullah but many 
supported him.  Just along the street from our 
new house was an abandoned strip of land that people used as a rubbish dump there is no rubbish 
collection in Swat.  This involved the army bribing them to halt all attacks 
and keep out foreign fighters.  It was shortly before the earthquake that Fazlullah had appeared in Imam 
Deri, a small village just a few miles outside Mingora on the other side of the Swat River, and set up 
his illegal radio station.  Zia even wanted to dictate how we should pray, and set up salat or 
prayer committees in every district, even in our remote village, and appointed 100,000 prayer 
inspectors.  One day our neighbours 
asked me to buy some maize for them from the bazaar.  Shehnaz and her sister had also been 
sent out to collect garbage after their father had died leaving them very poor.  Money poured in from all over the Arab 
world, particularly Saudi Arabia, which matched whatever the US sent, and volunteer fighters too, 
including a Saudi millionaire called Osama bin Laden.  If anyone 
offended him, their entire family could be expelled from Swat.  So our blood boiled over the Soviet invasion for both 
religious and nationalist reasons.  Khalida had 
been sold into marriage to an old man who used to beat her, and eventually she ran away with her 
three daughters.  

For us girls that doorway was like a magical entrance to our own special world.  In truth the tribal areas are not governed at 
all.  
If it was anything serious they would have to make the long bus journey to Mingora unless they were 
lucky enough to know someone with a car.  There were many families with no men.  Instead his cabinet was made up of the very same old faces.  He also kept dogs, which we Muslims regard as unclean.  Sometimes his men would display the fancy clothes that they said they had taken from 
decadent women to shame them.  Women were being locked up and beaten just for wearing 
nail varnish.  Thats why he 
decided he would make his father proud by entering the districts annual public speaking competition.  Or the day our kindergarten teacher Miss Ulfat told 
him I had written, Only Speak in Urdu, on the blackboard for my classmates at the start of an Urdu 
lesson so we would learn the language faster.  He was becoming known to the army too, and friends told him that the local commander had 
called him lethal in public.  Every time we 
felt a tremor we thought it was the Day of Judgement.  He brought logs back from the mountains for firewood, and after 
teaching he would work in the fields where our family had a few buffaloes.  Baba also gave him a 
deep love of learning and knowledge as well as a keen awareness of peoples rights, which my father 
has passed on to me.  The narrow 
street outside the school was totally flooded and he was soon up to his neck in water.  In 1969, the year my father was born, the wali gave up 
power and we became part of Pakistans North West Frontier Province, which a few years ago 
changed its name to Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.  But some people supported 
them because the very religious Pashtuns were angry at the American invasion of Afghanistan and the 
removal of the Taliban from power there.  Just after Christmas 1979 the Russians invaded our 
neighbour Afghanistan.  I will use it to make everyone happy As soon as I finished praying, I would check the 
drawer.  So a few days later my father called the mufti s 
elder brother, the girls father.  

Anyone could see that Musharraf was doubledealing, taking American money while still helping 
the jihadis strategic assets, as the ISI calls them.  

Yet she too got angry with him once.  He did not mention he could not afford to take it as he did not want to 
embarrass his father.  My father also saw the book as offensive to Islam 
but believes strongly in freedom of speech.  She 
was relieved to see us and hugged us, tears streaming down her face.  

I was confused by Fazlullahs words.  At first we thought we were safe 
in Mingora, the biggest town in Swat.  Shehnaz had never been to school, so even though she was two years older 
than me she was put two classes below, and she came to live with us so that I could help her.  We all played cricket on the street or rooftops together, but I knew 



as we got older the girls would be expected to stay inside.  Spring was when Swat was at its greenest.  The only way to cross the river is by rope bridges 
or on a pulley system by which people swing themselves across in a metal box.  Often women sell their jewellery to help set up 
their husbands in business or to pay their fares to go abroad.  We had no bathroom or kitchen, and my mother cooked on a wood 
fire on the ground and washed our clothes at a tap in the school.  In our Islamic studies class at school we used to write 
essays entitled How the Prophet Lived.  He was an 
extremely disciplined man and could not understand why they were not the same.  The only charity they know is to give to mosque and madrasa.  We have had three wars against India and what seems like endless killing 
inside our own country.  At 
this point Id realise the time and shout, Bhabi, Im late! In our culture, every man is your brother 
and every woman your sister.  

From an early age I was interested in politics and sat on my fathers knee listening to everything he 
and his friends discussed.  It does not matter what language you choose, the important 
thing is the words you use to express yourself.  When she was a teenager, both her father and the man she was supposed to marry were 
among thousands of Afghans fighting against the British occupation of their country.  

I was so eager not to disappoint my parents that I ran errands for anyone.  My 
parents first child was stillborn but I popped out kicking and screaming.  That same year, on 30 October, another US Predator hit a 



madrasa on a hill near the main town of Khar, killing eighty two people, many of them young boys.  Yet, outside the door to the school lay not only the noise and craziness of 



Mingora, the main city of Swat, but also those like the Taliban who think girls should not go to 
school.  
Our classes were still mixed at that age, and all the boys and girls yelled, Earthquake! We ran 
outside as we had been taught to do.  
There was no other college in Shangla, and if he didnt go to college, he would never be able to move 



out of the village and realise his dream.  
Hidayatullah was furious.  My dream was coming true.  

There was also Nooria, whose mother Kharoo did some of our washing and cleaning, and Alishpa, 
one of the daughters of Khalida, the woman who helped my mother with the cooking.  The Americans say they gave Pakistan billions of 
dollars to help their campaign against alQaeda but we didnt see a single cent.  We struggled to Mingora bus station, our bags laden with gifts for our family 
embroidered shawls and boxes of rose and pistachio sweets as well as medicine they could not get in 
the village.  In Pashtun society it is 
very hard to stomach a cousin being more popular, wealthier or more influential than you are.  



In 2002 Musharraf held elections for controlled democracy.  

Two years after I was born my brother Khushal arrived.  

Every year Shias commemorate the killing of the Prophets grandson Hussein Ibn Ali at the battle 
of Karbala in the year 680 with a festival called Muharram They whip themselves into a bloody 
frenzy with metal chains or razor blades on strings until the streets run red.  Bush and to 10 Downing Street by 
Tony Blair.  First my father would try to rouse me.  Unfortunately the demand for English tuition turned out to be low, and there 
were unexpected drains on their income.  Other boys, some known as good speakers, gave their speeches.  Tuition at Jehanzeb was free but my father needed money 
to live on.  The clerics of the mosques would often talk about the Soviet 
occupation of Afghanistan in their sermons, condemning the Russians as infidels and urging people to 
join the jihad, saying it was their duty as good Muslims.  
For many in the remote areas it was the first time they had seen a foreigner.  You could say I grew up 
in a school.  My father 
longed for the freedom that would come with running his own school.  The 
first tribal area that the army entered was South Waziristan, in March 2004.  So heaven with its seventy 
two virgins sounded attractive.  Notices had gone up at school for a public speaking 
competition and Moniba and I both decided to enter.  At dusk my father and his friends 
often gathered to sit and drink tea there.  

I am very proud to be a Pashtun but sometimes I think our code of conduct has a lot to answer for, 
particularly where the treatment of women is concerned.  My father was out a lot as he was 
busy, not just with his school, but also with literary societies and jirgas, as well as trying to save the 
environment, trying to save our valley.  My mother took me to say sorry to Safina and 
her parents.  Then as evening came it fell in shadow as the sun moved up the Black 
Mountain.  He had one much older brother, Saeed Ramzan who I call 
Uncle Khan dada, and five sisters.  When my father first brought his 
wife to school, all the teachers referred to her as my brothers wife or Bhabi.  Shortly after that I found the perfect way to 



try to win back the respect of my father.  My father also designed a shield with a famous quote from Khattak in 
Pashto: I girt my sword in the name of Afghan honour.  

Oof, I was so happy, by God, says my father.  We wont give him the building but be careful.  

Its the same old story, my father said, and he was right.  It was also becoming clear that while they were 
best friends, they found it hard to work as business partners.  Pashtuns are a proud 
people of many tribes split between Pakistan and Afghanistan.  I wondered what I would do.  Wed lived on the same street when 
we were little and been friends since primary school and we shared everything, Justin Bieber songs 
and Twilight movies, the best facelightening creams.  I am 
representing good Muslims and we all think your girls school is haram and a blasphemy.  But when they went 
there to look for a building, there were banners everywhere advertising a school opening someone 
had beaten them to it.  Safina started it, I protested.  On the road we 
passed dusty faced children bent double with huge bundles of grass on their backs and men leading 



flocks of shaggy goats that wandered hither and thither.  They were strange elections as the main 
party leaders Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto were in exile.  He believes he might even have thought of becoming a 
suicide bomber had there been such a thing in those days.  In the Holy Quran it is not written that men should go outside 
and women should work all day in the home.  This means cat and is her name for me.  Even so, it all seemed far, far away from our peaceful garden valley.  Many of them 
own expensive flats in London.  

Finally we made it up onto Sky Turn, the gateway to Shangla Top, a mountain pass which feels as if 
its on top of the world.  It was small in 
those days, just fifteen members, and my father quickly became vice president.  We dont respect 
privacy and there is no such thing as making an appointment to see someone.  If there were eggs, they would only be for the 



boys.  My father didnt know what exactly the brigadier meant, but in our 
country, where the army is so powerful, it did not bode well.  I told my best friend Moniba everything.  They learn that there is no such thing as science or literature, that 
dinosaurs never existed and that man never went to the moon.  The back 
where we sat had no windows, just thick plastic sheeting at the sides which flapped and was too 
yellowed and dusty to see through.  We also have the AhleHadith 
(people of the Hadith), who are Salafists.  That first year they had boys and girls together, but by 
2004 the climate had changed so it was unthinkable to have girls and boys in the same class.  

Hes actually a highschool dropout whose real name isnt even Fazlullah, my father retorted, but 
they wouldnt listen.  When they were taken 
in to see the pir, he instructed my father to open his mouth and then spat into it.  
Its hard for girls in our society to be anything other than teachers or doctors if they can work at all.  They set up volunteer traffic police called Falcon 
Commandos, who drove through the streets with machine guns mounted on top of their pickup trucks.  To begin with 
she didnt say much in class.  But then I felt guilty as I knew we were lucky.  

My father was at his wits end and wept with frustration.  The Americans 
claimed that alQaeda militants who had fled from Afghanistan during the US bombing were using the 
areas as a safe haven, taking advantage of our Pashtun hospitality.  One day, as Sher Zaman and two of his brothers were on their way to the land, 
they were ambushed by his uncle and some of his men.  He was so proud of the name that he would introduce himself to people with a famous verse 
in which his name appears.  It was mentioned as the most inspiring in 
the closing speech, and some in the audience asked him to repeat whole stanzas and couplets, 
exclaiming Wah wah when a particular line pleased them, which is a bit like Bravo.  

My cousin Reena came into my room They knew you were stealing, she said.  LeT had close links to the ISI and was set up to liberate Kashmir, which we believe should be 
part of Pakistan not India as its population is mostly Muslim.  Look at what these 
criminals are doing to pollute our beautiful valley, he always said.  I think when there is a great disaster or our lives are in danger we remember our 
sins and wonder how we will meet God and whether we will be forgiven.  I felt so happy, he recalls.  

My father was angry.  They also had to help the khans form a militia by 
providing an armed man for every small plot of land.  They get 
kickbacks on government contracts from friends or the companies they award them to.  Son, may you be the star in the sky of knowledge, he used to say.  These girls should be in purdah He told her, Take this building back from him 
and I will rent it for my madrasa.  

Some people were happy.  

I am proud that our country was created as the worlds first Muslim homeland, but we still dont 
agree on what this means.  The walls were concrete and there was running water so it was an improvement on our muddy 
shack, but we were still very cramped as we were sharing it with Hidayatullah and we almost always 
had guests.  Go away! 

The mufti had failed to close our school but his interference was an indication of how our country 
was changing.  What kind of mullah is he? Hes driving us crazy.  For us a turban is a public 
symbol of chivalry and Pashtunness, and for a man to lose his turban is considered a great humili 
ation.  

Swat lies on a geological fault line and we often had earthquakes, but this felt different.  Then we were on the main road built by the last wali, which follows 
the wide Swat River on the left and hugs the cliffs to the right with their emerald mines.  I was shot by a Taliban bullet and was 
flown out of Pakistan unconscious.  Most of them dont pay tax, 
but thats the least of it.  They 
threatened the widowers family until a jirga was called of village elders to resolve the dispute.  Everyone had to 
leave the district.  Some people took sacks of sugar and flour, and most of the baggage was tied to the top of 
the bus in a towering pile.  They knew he would have something interesting to say at workshops 
and seminars and wasnt afraid to criticise the authorities, even the army, which was now running our 
country.  

In the beginning Fazlullah was very wise.  Once some foreign archaeologists 
arrived to do some work there and told us that in times gone by it was a place of pilgrimage, full of 
beautiful temples domed with gold where Buddhist kings lay buried.  Her mother, my grandmother, had looked after all eight children 
alone after my grandfather had an accident and broke his pelvis and could not leave his bed for eight 
years.  

Ziauddin was a family man and they were unusually close, said Hidayatullah.  

For a while his Muslim identity seemed more important than anything else in his life.  My grandfather wrote his speeches 
and he almost always came first, gaining a reputation locally as an impressive speaker.  I was 
in the back with my mother.  Everyone knew these men belonged to LeT, and soon their 
black and white banners with crossed swords were flying everywhere in the mountains and valleys.  And now I had.  The boys learn the Quran by heart, rocking 
back and forth as they recite.  What kind of school is this? asked the official, 
laughing at his application.  He and my 
father had studied for their bachelors and masters degrees in English together and were both 
passionate about education.  

Malalai was the daughter of a shepherd in Maiwand, a small town on the dusty plains west of 
Kandahar.  Another of 
my aunts had married a man in that village and they had a relative visiting called Nasir Pacha, who 
saw my father at work.  The fire is reaching the valley.  He began to 
sign himself Ziauddin Panchpiri (the Panchpiri are a religious sect) and sprouted the first signs of a 
beard.  They were waiting 
for you to come clean but you just kept on.  I close my eyes 
and for a moment I am back in my valley the high snowtopped mountains, green waving fields 
and fresh blue rivers and my heart smiles when it looks at the people of Swat.  She is only there to prove that Isa [Jesus] was the son of Maryam, not the 
son of God! 

That may be, replied my father.  It consumed 
their lives.  

We were terribly worried about our family in Shangla, jammed between those narrow mountains.  She could speak confidently in front of hundreds of people and they would hang on her 
every word.  My grandmother was particularly good at them.  Once he visited Afghanistan for a poetry festival at the Kabul 
Intercontinental Hotel, where he read a poem about peace.  It was a peculiar 
system called wesh under which every five or ten years all the families would swap villages and 
redistribute the land of the new village among the men so that everyone had the chance to work on 
good as well as bad land.  Overlooking 
the river were tourist restaurants with big glass windows we had never been to.  My father did not get 
home till late that evening as he had been busy checking all the other school buildings.  Nasir Pacha had spent years in Saudi Arabia working in construction, making 
money to send back to his family.  He was recognised by the British as the head of state in 1926 and 
installed as wali, which is our word for ruler.  

Our army had never before gone into the FATA.  My father and a friend had founded their first school and we 
lived in a shabby shack of two rooms opposite the school.  Some 12,000 
young men from Swat went to help the Taliban.  They were 
just waiting to be married, says my father.  

It is our tradition for the bride to receive furniture or perhaps a fridge from her family and some 
gold from the grooms family.  
Sahib, he told him, I have a cousin who is ten years older than me and you have certified him ten 
years younger.  

Though my mother was not educated, she was the practical one in the family, the doer while my 
father was the talker.  Hed say, Mr Soandso was smoking chars but has stopped because its sinful, 
or, Mr X has kept his beard and I congratulate him, or, Mr Y voluntarily closed down his CD 
shop.  He even asked friends to throw dried fruits, sweets and coins into my cradle, something 
we usually only do for boys.  

Pashruns are famously frugal (though generous with guests), and Baba was particularly careful with 
money.  

One night, after the mufti had failed to persuade our landlady to cancel our lease, he gathered some 
of the influential people and elders of our mohalla into a delegation and turned up at our door.  Around this time my mother also got tired of 
Fazlullah, especially when he began to preach against education and insist that those who went to 
school would also go to hell.  Our people dont know their exact dates of birth my mother, 
for example, does not know when she was born.  It was, he says, the first thing Id done that made him smile.  The most visible of all was JamaatulDawa (JuD), the welfare wing of Lashkare 
Taiba.  Her story was like something out of the novels I had started reading.  On our new road there was a girl called Safina, who was a 
bit younger than me, and we started to play together.  My father raised money from the 
Swat Association of Private Schools and the Global Peace Council to add to what we had collected 
at school.  I read books and I had a 
different accent and used slang expressions from Mingora.  He gets so emotional you 
would think the events had happened just the night before, not more than 1,300 years ago.  But two years after I was born the generals again took over.  In the winter 
when parents didnt want their children to stay outside in the snow they would tell the story about the 
lion or tiger which must always make the first step in the snow.  

Student organisations which had been banned under Zia became very active.  
Around three and a half million people had lost their homes.  

During Eid we went to our family village as usual.  He said he would only run the country for a short 
time, but no one believed him.  To be safe we moved it into a cupboard and watched it 
with the volume low.  At the end of the pass is a greendomed 
shrine where people throw coins to give thanks for their safe arrival.  Her grandmother my 
great grandmother was widowed when her children were young, and her eldest son Janser Khan 
was locked up because of a tribal feud with another family when he was only nine.  The ISIs Colonel Imam boasted he had trained 90,000 Taliban fighters 
and even became Pakistans consul general in Herat during the Taliban regime.  Today Swat is part of the province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, or 
KPK, as many Pakistanis call it, but Swat used to be separate from the rest of Pakistan.  He had thought we were 
done with military dictatorships.  Only in emergencies can they go outside, but then they must 
wear the veil.  Like almost all 
the houses in the area, it was flatroofed and made of stone and mud.  In Pashto we 
love to sing tapey, twoline poems, and as she scattered the rice she would sing one: Dont kill 
doves in the garden.  In the autumn chill winds would 
come.  

General Musharraf called it a test of the nation and announced that the army had set up Operation 
Lifeline our army likes giving their operations names.  At first stealing gave 
me a thrill, but that did not last long.  Many of the imams appointed to preach in army barracks were Tablighis and army officers 
would often take leave and go on preaching tours for the group.  He told them they would have their reward in the hereafter.  Many students argued that the book 
should be banned and burned and the fatwa upheld.  She was beautiful and spoke in an 
animated way.  My parents had 
not held one for me because they could not afford the goat and rice needed to feed the guests, and my 
grandfather would not help them out because I was not a boy.  My mother is very devout, and to start with she liked Fazlullah.  We did not realise then that 9/11 would change our world 
too, and would bring war into our valley.  Sultana was very shorttempered and my mother did not like having 



her in the house, but my father arranged a small allowance for her and a place for Shehnaz and her 
other brother at his school.  

We had moved again we would move seven times by the time I was thirteen and were living in 
an apartment building.  

The whole nation was in shock for a long time after the earthquake.  I could 
see in his eyes that I had failed him I wanted him to be proud of me, like he was when I was 
presented with the first inyear trophies at school.  Benazir was our first female prime 
minister and the first in the Islamic world.  

Though I had been born in a city, I shared my fathers love of nature.  
Sending in the regular army was a tough decision.  I did not know how to stop.  

My father told the clerk to call him next time he saw the maulana.  The people who live in the FATA are all 
from Pashtun tribes like us Yousafzai, and live on both sides of the border with Afghanistan.  

As the Yousafzai in Swat had no ruler, there were constant feuds between the khans and even 
within their own families.  But Fazlullahs headquarters were just a few miles away, and 
even though the Taliban were not near our house they were in the markets, in the streets and the hills.  The name was ironic and my father often 
laughed about it, but the organisations aim was serious: to preserve the environment of Swat and 
promote peace and education among local people.  Nobody can marry a widow without the 
permission of her family.  The odd thing was no one had even noticed the publication of the book to start 
with it wasnt actually on sale in Pakistan but then a series of articles appeared in Urdu 
newspapers by a mullah close to our intelligence service, berating the book as offensive to the 
Prophet and saying it was the duty of good Muslims to protest.  Many of his classes were taught under a tree 
on the bare ground.  My father heard that many of the boys were taken in by the JuD and housed in 
their madrasas.  She always says, I have four brothers, and if I do even the slightest thing wrong they can stop 
me going to school.  Since 
the time of the Taliban our school has had no sign and the ornamented brass door in a white wall 
across from the woodcutters yard gives no hint of what lies beyond.  My mother was worried about telling him he had a daughter 
not a son, but he says he looked into my eyes and was delighted.  Their wives and children are still waiting for them I remember visiting them and feeling 
their longing.  

My father arrived at college at an important moment in Pakistans history.  

The night before we hardly slept because we were so excited.  The new partners 
again went from door to door, telling people they had started a new kind of school.  He 
ordered Karachi airport to switch off its landing lights and to park fire engines on the runway to block 
the plane even though it had 200 other passengers on board and not enough fuel to get to another 
country.  She took the pink phone that Aba bought me.  My father became depressed because people had begun to embrace Fazlullahs 
words and his religious romanticism.  Billions of dollars 
flowed into our exchequer from the United States and other Western countries, as well as weapons to 
help the ISI train the Afghans to fight the communist Red Army.  Musharraf then 
seized power and threw Sharif into a dungeon in Attack Fort.  You are the ones educating their children 

He soon became president of the organisation and expanded it until it included 400 principals.  In our province these elections brought 
what we called a mullah government to power.  

That is wrong! said the maulana.  

The people in Sewoor were Gujars, Kohistanis and Mians.  Pakistan took its place.  

When we got the topic, I couldnt believe my eyes.  We saw an official from the United Nations say on television that it was the worst logistical 
nightmare that the UN had ever faced.  
Chinese explorers wrote stories of how there were 1,400 Buddhist monasteries along the banks of the 
River Swat, and the magical sound of temple bells would ring out across the valley.  She disapproves of dancing because she says God would not like it, but she loves to decorate 
herself with pretty things, embroidered clothes and golden necklaces and bangles.  People would see us and say 
we are a sweet family.  

Scattered up and down the hills there were houses made of wattle and daub, like my grandfathers, 
and these often collapsed when there were floods.  Up there we were higher than the rocky peaks all around us.  Like all our dictators, he started by addressing the nation 
on TY, beginning, Mere aziz hamwatano  My dear countrymen then went into a long tirade 
against Sharif, saying that under him Pakistan had lost our honour, dignity and respect.  Millions of Afghans fled across the border and General Zia gave them refuge.  His teachers and friends tried to dissuade him and his father was 
reluctant to write the speech for him.  She had a little money of her own so they 
used it to hire a van and she moved to Mingora.  He said that one 
day, when a male member of staff took a female teacher out to the main road to get a rickshaw, the 
maulana asked, Why did this man escort her to the road, is he her brother? 

No, replied the clerk, he is a colleague.  I agree that female teachers should educate girls, he said.  

From the rooftop I watched the mountains change with the seasons.  Why should a girls life be ruined to settle a dispute she 
had nothing to do with? 

When I complained about these things to my father he told me that life was harder for women in 
Afghanistan.  

Go wherever you want, he told my mother and cousin.  It cant be repaid with expressions like thank 
you.  My cousin who was studying in the UK said they raised lots of money from 
Pakistanis living there.  Khalid Sheikh Mohammad, the mastermind of 9/ 1 1 , was found in a house just a mile 
from the army chief s official residence in Rawalpindi.  Miss Rubi, one of my favourite teachers, told us to stop crying and to stay 
calm; it would soon be over.  They were forcing men to grow beards as long 
as a lantern and women to wear burqas.  Only the radio was allowed, and all music except for 
Taliban songs was declared haram.  

I had decided very early I would not be like that.  We were once 
a princely state, one of three with the neighbouring lands of Chitral and Dir.  She saw 
their men were losing, and when the flagbearer fell she lifted her white veil up high and marched 
onto the battlefield in front of the troops.  I didnt mind not going to the 
Cheena Bazaar.  I didnt take them.  He used his 
station to encourage people to adopt good habits and abandon practices he said were bad.  

The Russian invasion transformed Zia from an international pariah to the great defender of freedom 
in the Cold War.  Then in the evening, when the white peak of Spin Ghar was 
even more beautiful than in the morning, we said the makkam or evening prayers.  
No, Jani, he replied.  So when the DCs came from Pakistan, 
they were the new kings and no one questioned them.  The 
women spent their days looking after the children and preparing food to serve to the men in their 
hujra upstairs.  

Jinnah had lived in London as a young man and trained as a barrister.  
So he put me and my brothers Khushal and Atal, then just a baby, to bed.  Quickly, it became a rubbish mountain.  They had examples like, If out 
of 10 Russian infidels, 5 are killed by one Muslim, 5 would be left or 15 bullets 10 bullets = 5 
bullets.  In the early part of the last century they became worried about being taken over 
by the British, who by then controlled most of the surrounding lands.  

One of their most heated debates in that first year was over a novel.  I didnt enjoy shopping, unlike my mother, who liked beautiful clothes even though 
we didnt have much money.  But I still went and bought the maize, took it 
to my neighbours and then went home.  But my father is an 
optimistic man and never deterred by practicalities.  I was determined it would not happen 
again.  Thats why I have problems with our Pashtunwali code.  We were told she had committed 
suicide, but we later discovered her own family had poisoned her.  At home we only had my grandfathers old radio, which was broken, 
but my mothers friends all listened and told her what they heard.  Pashtuns cannot stand anyone belittling them, nor was he about to pay a 
bribe for something he was entitled to.  In the far 
distance we could see the snows of Malam Jabba, our ski resort.  My grandfather had 
come to watch and I knew he really wanted me to win the competition, which made me even more 
nervous.  

Most Pakistanis are Sunnis like us more than eighty per cent but within that we are again many 
groups.  
He used to read by the light of the oil lamp in the hujra, and one evening he went to sleep and the oil 
lamp fell over.  I get bored 
going to the bazaar but I love to dance behind closed doors with my school friends.  You take one or two minutes to utter just one sentence.  It took them a week to clear the debris.  Whats wrong, JaniV he would 
ask.  The same is happening with Bajaur.  Our last 
dictator General Zia used to go there, and in the 1980s, under his regime, the Tablighis became very 
powerful.  It was such a 
small discount that most teachers did not bother, but he forced my father to apply for the rebate.  

As a respected man in the community, my father was often called on to mediate feuds.  He also helped Baba with 
heavy tasks like clearing snow from the roof.  All his 
books were inscribed with other boys names, never his own.  

My mother and her friends were upset about not being able to go shopping, particularly in the days 
before the Eid holidays, when we beautify ourselves and go to the stalls lit up by fairy lights that sell 
bangles and henna.  I think my 
mother would do the same for us.  The people are renowned for their fierceness and independence, as 
you can see if you read any of the old British accounts.  The 
Taliban were dressed in black and carried Kalashnikovs.  

Musharraf was our fourth military ruler.  Hospitality is an important part of Pashtun culture.  This made my father cross.  On top 
of some of the peaks were ruins where vultures circled, the remains of forts built by the first wali.  Of course this only applied to the men; women in 
our area dont vote.  

The most important part of the mock wedding was jewellery.  We breathed it into our lungs greedily.  Her own family would not take her back because it is believed that a woman who has 
left her husband has brought shame on her family.  Only then did I cry.  Shortly afterwards they had a visit from an 
official of WAPDA, the water and power company, who claimed their meter was rigged and 
demanded a bribe.  Marriage is part of life, we said.  My father was worried.  

Growing up, we children spent most of our time with our mother.  Their mouths were very 
rough and horny.  Almost two million of them were killed trying to cross the new border.  He had no idea how.  If you do this you will get paid now and also receive a reward in 
the next world.  

One day my father went to visit a friend in hospital and found lots of patients listening to cassettes 
of Fazlullahs sermons.  They had no interest in developing Swat.  My mother and I had 
already persuaded him to give free places to a number of girls.  You may belong to any religion or caste or creed that has nothing to do with 



the business of the state.  

When I was around four years old I asked my father, Aba, what colour are you? He replied, I 
dont know, a bit white, a bit black.  You could see them openly collecting contributions and recruiting men.  My grandfather was so 
furious he would not speak to them for their entire stay.  It can be taken by killing any male member of the attackers 
family.  The road left the river and wound 
up through narrow passes over steep firclad heights, higher and higher, until our ears popped.  

In our society marriages are usually arranged by families, but theirs was a love match.  Next to 



that was a smaller shed containing a panel with a confusion of wires sprouting from it.  

The other principals took paying bribes for granted, but my father argued that if all the schools 
joined together they could resist.  My father was 
teacher, accountant and principal.  Not 
everyone wanted to as they said the children were dirty and probably diseased, and their parents 
would not like them going to school with children like that.  
Others say, Oh its no big deal it was just a little thing.  I wished I had her whitelily skin, fine features and green 
eyes, but instead had inherited the sallow complexion, wide nose and brown eyes of my father.  My father was desperate not to give up the school so agreed to pay Naeem a return 
on his share of the investment.  There is a third power stronger than both, that 
of women But General Zia brought in Islamic laws which reduced a womans evidence in court to 
count for only half that of a mans.  
My favourite programme was Shaka Laka Boom Boom, an Indian childrens series about a boy called 
Sanju who has a magic pencil.  People liked this as justice was 
speedy, unlike in Pakistani courts, where you could wait years and have to pay bribes to be heard.  It was, he says, a kind of brainwashing.  I walked back to my mother with my head bowed.  They are 
now refugees and theyre living with us.  They wore black badges which said 
shariat ya shahadat sharia law or martyrdom and sometimes black turbans, so people 
called them Tor Patki or the Black Turbaned Brigade.  They looked so tasty that I couldnt resist grabbing a handful.  There was a plum tree in our front yard which 
gave the most delicious fruit.  When my father was at home, he and his friends sat on 
the roof at dusk and talked politics endlessly.  My brothers loved this, and they would taunt me and my mother by pointing out the 
wreckage of vehicles on the mountainside.  Instead he sent her poems 
she could not read.  

When i was born, people in our village commiserated with my mother and nobody congratulated my 
father.  One good thing Fazlullah 
is doing is banning ladies and girls from going to the Cheena Bazaar, which saves us men money, he 
said.  Our town of Mingora was largely spared 
just a few buildings collapsed but neighbouring Kashmir and the northern areas of Pakistan were 
devastated.  Only twice had I not come top both 
times when I was beaten by my class rival Malka eNoor.  Then the Radio Mullah turned his attention to schools.  My grandfather never bought him new books.  My father wrote a poem, The 
Relics of Butkara, which summed up perfectly how temple and mosque could exist side by side: 
When the voice of truth rises from the minarets,/ The Buddha smiles,/ And the broken chain of 
history reconnects.  (The 
average annual income is just $250 half the Pakistani average.  

I was named after Malalai of Maiwand, the greatest heroine of Afghanistan.  It became known as Mullah 
FM and Fazlullah as the Radio Mullah.  Just as Khattak had wanted the 
Pashtuns to unite against a foreign enemy, so we needed to unite against ignorance.  In 
our culture orphans are usually taken in by the extended family, but the earthquake was so bad that 
entire families had been wiped out or lost everything so were in no position to take in children.  Moniba had become my best friend 
in primary school when we lived near each other, and I persuaded her to come to our school.  



We remembered how scared we had been that morning and started raising money at school.  Sadly those minority communities are 
often attacked.  The education officer would call to arrange an inspection then give a detailed order for his 
lunch.