  Although my condition had been stabilised 
it was felt that I needed to be moved within fortyeight hours, seventytwo at the most.   

We too were proud, but his higher profile meant we didnt see him very much.   We dumped our backpacks in our rooms then gathered for morning assembly under the 
sky, our backs to the mountains as we stood to attention.   Our home was always full of people 
visiting from the village.   
More than 73,000 people had been killed and 128,000 injured, many of them permanently disabled.   

Why dont you come and live with us? asked Nasir Pacha.   

People used to talk about Shabanas bad character, but our men both wished to see her dance and 
also despised her because she was a dancer.   But when they 
came round in October 2012 I felt under pressure.   After about ten 
minutes of this he realised from my facial expressions that I could understand him perfectly.   Then we were on the main road built by the last wali, which follows 
the wide Swat River on the left and hugs the cliffs to the right with their emerald mines.   We would cry in terror, though in 
fact as toe and finger in Pashto is the same, we were all twenty fingered, but we didnt realise.   Sometimes I was very 
afraid but I said nothing, and it didnt mean I would stop going to school.   My father was desperate not to give up the school so agreed to pay Naeem a return 
on his share of the investment.   We were 
often joined by my fathers friend Zahid Khan, a fellow member of the Swat Qaumi Jirga.   

Then, at the end of 2008, Fazlullahs deputy Maulana Shah Dauran announced on the radio that all 
girls schools would close.   Then many more bombings followed, almost 
every day.   The Americans were worried that their ally 
General Musharraf was too unpopular in Pakistan to be effective against the Taliban so they had 
helped broker an unlikely powersharing deal.   But then they went ahead and closed our school and I felt embarrassed.   I think of her as my big sister even though I am six months 
older than her.   One day he would go to the primary school first, 
another day to the girls school, the next day to the boys school.   The terrorists even blew up the ski lift and the big hotel in Malam 
Jabba where tourists used to stay.   
Vast camps of white tents sprang up mostly around Peshawar, some of which are still there today.  

Just in front of the school on Khushal Street, where I was born, was the house of a tall handsome 
mullah and his family.   Even to enter our valley people needed official permission.   Sit inside, Atal Khan, or 
I wont take you! he said.   

My fathers friend Hidayatullah had become a government official in Peshawar and warned us, 



This is how these militants work.   At that time my father was only twelve years old and too young to fight.   

They are scared of the pen, he replied.   I am inspired by Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the man who some call the Frontier Gandhi, 
who introduced a non violent philosophy to our culture.   Then 
she asked my father, Did you know, Ziauddin, that the Taliban have threatened this innocent girl? 
We didnt know what she was talking about so she went on the Internet and showed us that the 
Taliban had that day issued threats against two women Shad Begum, an activist in Dir, and me, 
Malala.   He described Pakistans courts as unIslamic and said, I 
consider Western democracy a system imposed on us by the infidels.   But some people supported 
them because the very religious Pashtuns were angry at the American invasion of Afghanistan and the 
removal of the Taliban from power there.   Am I in an office or am I in a 
police station or a court? Am I a criminal? He decided to challenge the officials to protect other 
school owners from such bullying and corruption.   I thought my school would not close and it had.   But then I felt guilty as I knew we were lucky.   They heard that offers 
were pouring in from overseas to treat me including from America, where a top hospital called Johns 
Hopkins had offered free treatment.   At 3 p.   It was strange to think that Bangladesh was once part of Pakistan 
despite being a thousand miles away.   

Usman Bhai Jan started the dyna and we were off.   I found it particularly hard in the 
afternoon, when I didnt want to be dragged away from the TV At exam time I prayed to Allah for 
high marks though our teachers used to warn us, God wont give you marks if you dont work hard.   

My father consoled me by telling me about the mistakes great heroes made when they were 
children.   Teachers helped us beforehand on how to respond to 
questions.   

Our street could not be reached by car, so coming home I would get off the bus on the road below 
by the stream and go through a barred iron gate and up a flight of steps.   Sometimes though she would be out because 
she was shopping for clothes in the Cheena Bazaar, and that would be a different matter.   There would be bowls of chicken, rice, local spinach and spicy mutton, all cooked over the fire 
by the women, followed by plates of crunchy apples, slices of yellow cake and a big kettle of milky 
tea.   Fazlullah kept broadcasting that girls should stay at home and his men had started 
blowing up schools, usually during nighttime curfew when the children were not there.   I think there was some problem with hygiene in that muddy place, says my father.   In our village there was a widow called Soraya who married a 
widower from another clan which had a feud with her family.   I was already missing the green of Swat.   They had no interest in developing Swat.   He was 
offered an escort by some fellow political activists but he thought that it would be too late to go if he 
waited for them.   Many girls schools in Afghanistan are named after her.   

I would reply, It doesnt matter; Im also looking at them, and shed get so cross.   Our own museum in Swat had 
closed.   

When I stand in front of my window and look out, I see tall buildings, long roads full of vehicles 
moving in orderly lines, neat green hedges and lawns, and tidy pavements to walk on.   

One of my fathers colleagues at the school was his friend Mohammad Naeem Khan.   Thousands of people were leaving with just the 
clothes they had on their backs.   She is a 
wise girl, though we often fall out, particularly when we go on school trips.   The few concrete houses had 
been built by families whose sons or fathers had gone south to work in the mines or to the Gulf, from 
where they sent money home.   It wasnt the best of days to start 
with as it was the middle of school exams, though as a bookish girl I didnt mind them as much as 
some of my classmates.  

Swat lies on a geological fault line and we often had earthquakes, but this felt different.   We flew to 
Karachi, and it was the first time any of us had ever been on a plane.   So he went to 
the school most days and actually tried to teach the children.   It 
was risky but it was the only ambition I had back then.   They are sitting in their bunkers on top of the hills.   On the road we 
passed dusty faced children bent double with huge bundles of grass on their backs and men leading 



flocks of shaggy goats that wandered hither and thither.   As a nation we have always been good at hockey, but Zia made 



our female hockey players wear baggy trousers instead of shorts, and stopped women playing some 
sports altogether.   I loved the rich soil, the 
greenness of the plants, the crops, the buffaloes and the yellow butterflies that fluttered about me as I 
walked.   But 

We lived in the most beautiful place in all the world.   The story was that they had then planted the body in Abbottabad and faked 
the raid to embarrass Pakistan.   People 
reassured my mother that although I had been shot in the head, the bullet had just skimmed my 
forehead.   I saw tears in my parents eyes.   I was determined it would not happen 
again.   If you do this you will get paid now and also receive a reward in 
the next world.   Once some foreign archaeologists 
arrived to do some work there and told us that in times gone by it was a place of pilgrimage, full of 
beautiful temples domed with gold where Buddhist kings lay buried.   

One day a man from along the street came and told us that it had been announced in the mosques 
that there would be a curfew the next day.   He said 
men should keep their beards but give up smoking and using the tobacco they liked to chew.   When my father asked why, he explained it was his villages turn to work on 
Fazlullahs buildings.   They dont accept our 
saints and shrines many Pakistanis are also mystical people and gather at Sufi shrines to dance and 
worship.   It seemed to us that the Taliban arrived in the night just like vampires.   When Sufi 
Mohammad was imprisoned in a roundup of militant leaders in 2002, Fazlullah had taken over the 
movements leadership.   

Finally we got through the mountain pass at Malakand and left Swat behind.   Hed say, Mr Soandso was smoking chars but has stopped because its sinful, 
or, Mr X has kept his beard and I congratulate him, or, Mr Y voluntarily closed down his CD 
shop.   

Dear Muslim brothers 

There is a school, the Khushal School, which is run by an NGO [NGOs have a very bad reputation among religious people in our 



country so this was a way to invite peoples wrath] and is a centre of vulgarity and obscenity.   We received other shocking news.   His name was Musa Khan Khel, and he had 
often interviewed my father.   Moniba often brought 
food to school and would just bring one spare fork.   

Sufi Mohammad said nothing about education.   It wasnt a good way to leave things.   It was very hard.   First our 
father and family, then our street, then our whole mohalla, then all Swat.   Above the nurses station 
the clock showed it was just after 5 p.   I always knew my mother was a strong woman but I 
looked at her with new respect.   All his 
books were inscribed with other boys names, never his own.   

Some people even claimed the video was fake.   When we went on school 
trips to visit the mountains, I knew she couldnt afford them so I would pay for her with my pocket 
money.   We Pashtuns love shoes but dont love the cobbler; we 
love our scarves and blankets but do not respect the weaver.   It 
was very sad as in the end the family was betrayed and arrested and Anne died in a concentration 
camp when she was only fifteen.   

In March I stopped writing my blog as Hai Kakar thought there was not much more to say.   The MQM 
is a very organised movement, and the mohajir community sticks together.   Three local men, Mukhtar Khan Yousafzai, 
Khurshid Kakajee and Zahid Khan went from /my ra to hujra persuading elders to join together.   He had written, Now you have become very popular, I still love 
you and know you love me.   Strangers came to the house asking 
questions about my family.   His own father was just an ordinary soldier and 
died young, leaving him as the eldest son of eight to support his entire family.   
So when a new girl named MalkaeNoor joined our class, I didnt think anything of it.   The chief minister of KPK was the first person who called.   You will not find a single 
child to drink a drop of the vaccine anywhere in Swat.   My father used to grumble, Were a school not a poultry farm.   Then, under 
the pretext of bringing in aid, they could legitimately enter Pakistan and spy on all our secrets.   
They hung him and then they shot his father.   It was always a race between us and the birds to get to them.   My father was disappointed 
when I didnt win but I pointed out to him that all I had done was speak out; we didnt have an 
organisation doing practical things like the award winners had.   Some men refused to fight, not wishing to battle their own people.   All the private schools were in the same boat.   Moniba was devastated and the whole town was in shock.   Never in history have Khushal and Malala been friends.   He watched paralysed with fear as they almost 
touched the water.   They told us they 
were Seraiki speakers from southern Punjab and wanted their own province.   The Taliban bulldozed both our Pashtun values and the values of Islam.   He is just fooling people.   Again we got the same, so we both got the prize.   

Journey into the Unknown 



I was shot on a Tuesday at lunchtime.   I played Romeo as a civil servant interviewing people for a job.   But I am pointing out that the Quran names Maryam.   The Americans 
said he had been tipped off and escaped.   

My fathers college held a heated debate in a packed room.   She replied that 
Christ had died on the cross for the sins of Christians and asked what the Prophet Mohammad had 
done for Muslims.   They thought it was 
shameful for their children to mix with those from poor families.   He went there by bus, and it seemed so big 
to him compared to his home village that he thought hed arrived in a city.   

It was about 5.   He was the nephew of my fathers friend Zahid Khan, the hotel 
owner who had been attacked in 2009.   Some people 
said that Fazlullah had been captured but that the army and the ISI couldnt agree on what to do with 
him.   I 
think it was then that Adam decided he should focus on me.   I did not like going barefoot.   But Zia turned out to be a very 
wily man.   It was 
leaning against the wall and I screamed as we lifted it.   I did not want to come second to MalkaeNoor 
again as I had in March.   

When he finally found my father, he learned that he had heard a woman crying that her husband was 
trapped in their house and he had rushed in to save him.   

My father tried not to think about the past and whether he had been wrong to encourage me to speak 
out and campaign.   It was easy.   Then all that night we heard dar dar dar, the boom of cannons and machine guns 
from the hills.   

At twelve oclock Baba called us over the loudspeaker.   My mother was very confused by all the different stories, first that my foot had been injured, 
then that I had been shot in the head.   First a brother on one side would attack an uncle on the other.   

Adam was astonished.   He had 
called Khushal, and together they joined the weeping.   Usman Bhai Jan, our driver, made us laugh 
as usual.   Nurses and doctors kept coming in and out.   

The Musharraf government didnt seem to know what to do.   Pakistan took its place.   You must go.   When we got there the helicopter had not arrived, and we waited 
for what to him felt like hours inside the ambulance.   My parents say I have 
qualities of both grandfathers humorous and wise like my mothers father and vocal like my fathers 
father! Baba had grown soft and whitebearded in his old age and I loved going to visit him in the 
village.   

One day I saw my father and his friends watching a video on his phone.   Here there is any convenience you can imagine.   There was a plum tree in our front yard which 
gave the most delicious fruit.   No one would venture 
from their homes after sunset.   The more interviews I gave, the stronger I felt and the more 
support we received.   Were not going to operate at this stage.   Sometimes I sat on the roof too, watching the smoke rise from 
the cooking fires all around and listening to the nightly racket of the crickets.   The nurses werent telling me 
anything.   Some people took sacks of sugar and flour, and most of the baggage was tied to the top of 
the bus in a towering pile.   

This didnt mean we went easy on the army.   Please stop it! she begged in Pashto in 
between screams and whimpers as each blow was delivered.   I thought we would never leave Swat and 
we were just about to.   

On 12 November Musharraf ordered 10,000 more troops into our valley with additional helicopter 
gunships.   Neither place is a good place to be.   They had been sent by General Kayani after the British doctors had reported 
back to him that if I was left in Peshawar I would suffer brain damage or might even die because of 
the quality of the care and the high risk of infection.   As we always did, we called to each other to make sure we 
were all safe.   

My father then signed an in loco parentis document making Dr Fiona my guardian for the trip to 
the UK.   

These were strangelooking men with long straggly hair and beards and camouflage vests over their 
shalwar kamiz, which they wore with the trousers well above the ankle.   

We heard on the news that Musharraf had sent 3,000 troops into our valley to confront the Taliban.   When 
the NGOs received threatening letters from the Taliban and went to the DC to ask for his help, he 
wouldnt even listen to them.   

This is typical, he said.   One of 
the most vocal people against me was a female MP called Dr Raheela Qazi from the religious 
JamaateIslami party.   but your country faces a lot of problems.   I think the Pakistan 
government is basically abdicating to the Taliban and the extremists, said Hillary Clinton, the US 
Secretary of State.   

Afterwards General Abbas gave some of us his visiting card and told us to contact him if we ever 
needed anything.   

There was one big problem.   In return he would drop corruption 
charges against her and her husband and agree to hold elections, which everyone assumed would 
result in Benazir becoming prime minister.   Why are you asking all these questions? he demanded.   

How can we do that? I replied.   

When Musharraf sent troops into the FATA, starting with Waziristan in 2004, the brothers led a 
campaign declaring the military action un Islamic.   Dont they want 
them to learn? 

Our headmistress Madam Maryam had studied at Sangota, and her younger sister Ayesha was a 
pupil there, so she and some of the other Sangota girls transferred to our school.  One year ago I left my home for school and never returned.   He had studied in a 
British school in Peshawar, and perhaps because his own father was illiterate he was passionate 
about schools and built many, as well as hospitals and roads.   They dont have the 
power.   But when half of 
your leaders tell lies and the other half is negotiating with the Taliban, there is nowhere to go.   

We had begun to think about other things besides the Taliban, but it wasnt possible to forget 
completely.   

Colonel Junaid examined me.   

Our area had always been more conservative than most of the rest of Pakistan.   I wrote a sketch based on Romeo 
and Juliet about corruption.   
Everyone brought what they could.   She rushed home and told my grandmother, who was staying with us at the time.   The news showed shocking pictures of the wreckage, everywhere blood and 
broken glass, and dead bodies.   
But this was different.   

I just want to know if my husband is dead or not, pleaded one lady I met.   In my fathers small village eight people had been killed and 
many homes destroyed.   It was as though they wanted to remove all traces of womankind 
from public life.   She had hit him so hard 
that when she looked at the shoe it was broken.   

Muslim Khan said that Sangota was a convent school teaching Christianity and that Excelsior was 
coeducational, teaching girls and boys together.   They convinced themselves that the shariat in Swat would be 
different to the Afghan version we would still have our girls schools and there would be no 
morality police.   

It was nightfall by the time we reached Besham as many roads were blocked.   The 
Taliban were dressed in black and carried Kalashnikovs.   Even so, some teachers still gave us homework.   We needed peace whoever brought it.   The dates of the feasts are announced by a 
special panel of clerics who watch for the appearance of the crescent moon.   Just as Khattak had wanted the 
Pashtuns to unite against a foreign enemy, so we needed to unite against ignorance.   All across northwestern Pakistan different 
militant groups had emerged led by people from various tribal groups.   

Anyone could see that Musharraf was doubledealing, taking American money while still helping 
the jihadis strategic assets, as the ISI calls them.   Nawaz 
Sharif was so worried about his reaction that he tried to stop the plane from landing in Pakistan.   In reality I went back inside.   I remember that inside the dyna it was hot and sticky.   

One day a lady called Shehla Anjum turned up at our hostel.   So British India was 
divided in August 1947, and an independent Muslim state was born.   The whole affair left a lot of bad feeling, particularly because on 17 March, 
the day after Davis was released, a drone attack on a tribal council in North Waziristan killed about 
forty people.  m.   But there were also text 
messages which ridiculed the army.   She still has lots to do.   We were told she had committed 
suicide, but we later discovered her own family had poisoned her.   My fathers voice is so loud my mother often jokes that he doesnt need to make phone 
calls, he can just shout.   After my father had graduated from 
school he had nothing to do so he volunteered to help his brother.   My 
fathers close friend Wahid Zamans brother and brotherinlaw were among the many who went to 
Afghanistan.   He said they 
had told him, Either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists, and threatened to bomb us back 
to the Stone Age if we stood against them.   In the ones from the early days of Pakistan you 
could easily see from his thin sunken face that Jinnah was dying.   The Taliban think we are not Muslims but we are.   
We sat stunned.   
Its hard for girls in our society to be anything other than teachers or doctors if they can work at all.   The Pakistan army had far more men and heavy weapons so they 
quickly managed to recapture the valley.   Dr Fiona was about to leave for the airport to fly back to Birmingham her bags were already at 
the airport but when she heard the news, she offered to help and two nurses from her hospital in 
Birmingham stayed on with her.   

A few days later I saw Safina playing with a phone exactly the same as mine.   Her dream was to be a fashion designer 



although she knew her family would never agree to it, so she told everyone she wanted to be a doctor.   There 
was one ray of hope Benazir Bhutto was returning.   My father said 
people had been seduced by Fazlullah.   When Moniba spoke she couldnt control her tears.   My father was out a lot as he was 
busy, not just with his school, but also with literary societies and jirgas, as well as trying to save the 
environment, trying to save our valley.   They looked so tasty that I couldnt resist grabbing a handful.   
Kill Malala and silence me for ever.   God is not a miser, she said.   

We couldnt see in front, but a young bearded man in lightcoloured clothes had stepped into the 
road and waved the van down.   My father raised money from the 
Swat Association of Private Schools and the Global Peace Council to add to what we had collected 
at school.   Then she had beaten me by not just one or two marks, the usual difference 
between us, but by five marks! I had been taking extra lessons with Sir Amjad who ran the boys 



school.   We heard stories that the Taliban would hear children laughing and 
burst into the room and smash the boards.   Moniba spoke well she was very 
composed and her speech was more emotional and poetic than mine, though mine might have had the 
better message.   They were both away when, ten days later, there 
was a second flood and the building again filled with mud.   Even my 
grandfather was proud.   He explained that 
the children would sell what they had sorted to a garbage shop for a few rupees.   My father was 
embarrassed and for once, short of words.   
My father says that in that moment he could not hold back his tears.   We played marbles in the yard over and over again.   The 
senior elder was a whitebearded man of seventy four called Abdul Khan Khaliq who had been one 
of the Queens bodyguards when she had visited Swat to stay with our wali.   

Then I went and sat on my bed.   

He had however neglected to tell his partner.   

My grandmother was so worried about my fathers stutter that when he was still a young boy she 
took him to see a holy man.   

The mufti on Khushal Street was a member of Tablighi Jamaat, a Deobandi group that holds a huge 
rally every year at its headquarters in Raiwind, near Lahore, attended by millions of people.   In Swat the doctors had told him this was something simple, now 
it seemed very serious.   It seemed to me that before Pakistan there was endless fighting between Hindus and Muslims.   

Just when it seemed matters could not get worse, the area was hit by flash floods.   It felt as if my honour was at stake for five 
rupees, he told me.   They warned people to stop listening to music, 
watching movies and dancing.   The news at first was muddled and she initially believed Id been in an accident and had 
injured my foot.   

Hes actually a highschool dropout whose real name isnt even Fazlullah, my father retorted, but 
they wouldnt listen.   What are you 
dreaming about? 

Just about crossing oceans, Aba , I replied.   

Under Zias regime life for women in Pakistan became much more restricted.   When my father refused, a bill arrived with a large fine.   

My father called my cousin Khanjee to find out how widely the letters had been distributed.   

He drew a sketch of his attacker and said the man should be stopped before shooting anyone else.   One of our neighbours told us he 
had even seen them leaving the bodies of dead Taliban in the streets for all to see.   It was 
wonderful that my friends wanted to share in my success.   In our country, where the army has seized power so many times, people are often 
wary of the military, particularly those from Swat, where the army had taken so long to act against the 
Taliban.   He was worried about how 
confused I would be.   On 12 July which I remember 
because it was my birthday Fazlullah gave a radio address that was quite different to his previous 
ones.   How dare the Taliban take away my basic right to education? I said.   The letter had been buried on an inside page and the editor 
had published his name and the address of the school, which my father had not expected him to do.   It was wonderful to hear that sound and run 
through the doorway and up the steps as we used to.  / Either he leaves from 
poverty or he leaves for love.   He and his family lived 
with my grandfather, and whenever he saved up enough of his salary, they built a small concrete hujra 
at the side of the house for guests.   Teach him it 
is far more honourable to fail than to cheat.   But my grandfather knew that his cousin was actually much older than him.   It broadcast every night from eight to ten and again in the 
morning from seven to nine.   
Though Afghans are renowned fighters, Colonel Imam, the officer heading the programme, 
complained that trying to organise them was like weighing frogs.   I asked, Two or three months ago you told us 
Fazlullah and his deputy were shot and injured, and then you said they were in Swat and sometimes 
you say theyre in Afghanistan.   Tuition at Jehanzeb was free but my father needed money 
to live on.   The 
following day a suicide bomber attacked another army truck in Swat, killing seventeen soldiers and 
thirteen civilians.   Shortly after that I found the perfect way to 



try to win back the respect of my father.   After some time they went to visit 
some tribes in Swat to win their support so they could return to Afghanistan.   When a man tried to help her she refused and said.   He set up the first telephone system and built the first 
primary school and ended the wesh system because the constant moving between villages meant no 
one could sell land or had any incentive to build better houses or plant fruit trees.   We normally dont have monsoons in Swat and at first we were happy, thinking 
the rain would mean a good harvest.   In the winter everything was white snow, long icicles hanging from the roof like daggers, 
which we loved to snap off.   
His phone kept ringing.   

My father was anxious to check on the school.   Little did we know that years later the same maulana s organisation would become the 
Swat Taliban.   

But my father had a big problem.   Be natural, Irfan told me.   These are bad days.   When she was born our luck changed.   Both things are false! replied my father.   There was no sound from the river or the wind; even 
the birds were not chirping.   Another was a girl in my class called Kausar, whose 
father embroidered clothes and shawls a trade our region is famous for.   When I complained about my 
books my brothers whined about their chickens.   

Things often seemed to happen around my birthday, and around the time I turned thirteen in July 
2010 the rain came.   

Adam could not come to Swat because it was too dangerous for foreigners.   How could he have lived so close to the 
capital just sixty miles away? And for so long! Maybe the best place to hide is in plain sight, but he 
had been living in that house since the 2005 earthquake.   Are you trying to bring shame on us that we cant 
afford to buy such things? 

Its not true! I lied.   When 
the highest authority in your district joins the Taliban, then Talibanisation becomes normal.   He went everywhere he could demanding the reconstruction of both schools.   

When he returned a few days later he was ashen.   

My father came home fuming.   On Fridays the brothers would creep into the mosque and watch in 
wonder as my grandfather stood in the pulpit and preached to the congregation for an hour or so, 
waiting for the moment when his voice would rise and practically shake the rafters.   I arrived at dawn as the last star blinked out.   

He laughed.   My father does not respond well to being pushed and remained firm even though it was 
clear that by now he was creating havoc.  m when they 
saw me for the last time in Pakistan.   

In 1949, two years after the creation of Pakistan, he abdicated in favour of his elder son Miangul 
Abdul Haq Jehanzeb.   

That winter it snowed and we built snow bears but without much joy.   The same is happening with Bajaur.   To try and boost 
their income they ran a tuck shop at school, going off in the mornings and buying snacks to sell to the 
children.   

Spit it out, son! hed roar whenever my father got stuck in the middle of a sentence.   That day instead of a story he did a magic trick to make a 
pebble disappear.   Mullahs often misinterpret the 
Quran and Hadith when they teach them in our country as few people understand the original Arabic.   My two grandfathers did not get on.   First I thought of wearing a very 
beautiful dress, but then I decided to wear something more modest for the interview as I wanted 
people to focus on my message and not my clothes.   My fathers cousin Jehan Sher Khan 
Yousafzai was one of the few who came to celebrate my birth and even gave a handsome gift of 
money.   They were forcing men to grow beards as long 
as a lantern and women to wear burqas.   Money poured in from all over the Arab 
world, particularly Saudi Arabia, which matched whatever the US sent, and volunteer fighters too, 
including a Saudi millionaire called Osama bin Laden.   At dusk my father and his friends 
often gathered to sit and drink tea there.   My father always says, While Badshah Sahib brought peace, his son brought 
prosperity.   They learn that there is no such thing as science or literature, that 
dinosaurs never existed and that man never went to the moon.   No Pashtun leaves his land of his own sweet will, she would say.   Our mood on the way home was the exact 
opposite of what we had felt on the way to the meeting.   They are 
now refugees and theyre living with us.   When it was my mothers turn she said, I want to live in 
the city and be able to send out for kebabs and naan instead of cooking it myself.   The brides would wear exquisite clothes and be draped in gold, necklaces 
and bangles given by both sides of the family.   I close my eyes 
and for a moment I am back in my valley the high snowtopped mountains, green waving fields 
and fresh blue rivers and my heart smiles when it looks at the people of Swat.   When 
the earthquake happened and our government did little to help, JuD set up relief camps patrolled by 



men with Kalashnikovs and walkietalkies.   She is a very traditional woman and this is our centuriesold culture.   

In our valley we received most of our information from the radio because so many had no TV or 
are illiterate.   I think my 
mother would do the same for us.   



Some of Jinnahs most famous speeches were displayed.   I read books and I had a 
different accent and used slang expressions from Mingora.   There was no kitchen, no plumbing.   

Its very good, he said with a knowing smile.   Youre worried about something but youre not telling us.   People there said 
Chechens and Uzbeks were among the fighters.   My father would buy maize and stay up late at night making and bagging popcorn.   Up there we were higher than the rocky peaks all around us.   The 
vehicle we were in even had to pass through an explosives check before we could head up the 
Malakand Pass.   

Atal got very cross.   After the PM presented 
me with the award and cheque, I presented him with a long list of demands.   My father quickly got 
involved in student politics and became known as a talented speaker and debater.   He felt ashamed but had no choice if he didnt want to end up illiterate.   She knew he couldnt let her go 
alone.   

After a couple of rulers who did not work out, in 1917 the chiefs settled on a man called Miangul 
Abdul Wadood as their king.   She had been married off as soon as 
she entered puberty.   Nowhere is it written in the Quran 
that a woman should be dependent on a man.   Finally, they let us through.   My fathers elder 
brother Saeed Ramzan had worked for years as a teacher at a local school.   The girl had a big sack and was sorting rubbish into piles, one for cans, one for 
bottle tops, another for glass and another for paper.   If they were 
going to kill me they would have done it in 2009, I said.   They have already blown 
up hundreds of schools and no one has done anything.   

We have a special history too.   Finally on the evening of 3 July 
commandos with tanks and armoured personnel carriers surrounded the mosque.   One day my father and I went to Peshawar to appear on a BBC Urdu talk show hosted by 
a famous columnist called Wasatullah Khan.   He 
quickly agreed it was the right thing to do, although afterwards he said, None of us ever imagined 
how much it would take over the hospital.   Miss Rubi, one of my favourite teachers, told us to stop crying and to stay 
calm; it would soon be over.   Education is neither Eastern nor Western, it is human.   In our culture, if someone dies women come to the home of the 
deceased and the men to the hujra not just family and close friends but everyone from the 
neighbourhood.   He made us all laugh with 
his crazy stories.   I could not speak, my eyes were shut and it was only my breath 
that reassured them I was still alive.   Foreigners call them 
suicide bridges but we loved them.   So when my father was 
thirteen and told my grandfather he was entering a public speaking competition he was stunned.   

Then Id pray.   How many teachers do you have? Three! Your teachers are not trained.   Safinas mother next door had deposited her 



gold in a bank vault for safekeeping and even that had been looted.   He told him that the scan in Swat had been done from only one angle, but this 
new scan showed the injury was more serious.   Tell me how can one 
live without daughters, he sobbed.   I never noticed before how beautiful her eyes 
are, said Maryam.   Only 
two escaped, and they fled to Peshawar along with their tribesmen.   My father was in tears as he gave her my passport and took her hand.   What is going on in your school? they demanded.   One of his friends went instead.   
While we were there we heard that Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the American envoy to Pakistan 
and Afghanistan, was holding a meeting in the Serena Hotel about the conflict, and my father and I 
managed to get inside.   There were 
offers too from Germany, Singapore, the UAE and Britain.   

Lots of buildings were surrounded by concrete blocks, and there were checkpoints for incoming 
vehicles to guard against suicide bombs.   When we reached Mingora 
we were shocked.   But just like during the earthquake, it was mainly volunteers 
from Islamic groups who were the first to arrive in the more remote and isolated areas with aid.   He read it out.   We did not realise then that 9/11 would change our world 
too, and would bring war into our valley.   The army had destroyed his headquarters in Imam Deri and 
then claimed to have him surrounded in the mountains of Peochar.   I am staying here.   I wrinkled my nose as I approached, swatting away flies and making sure I didnt step 
on anything in my nice shoes.   The 
hospital could not cope with all the patients and had to erect big tents outside to treat people.   

At first we assumed our government had known and been involved in the American operation.   My father and his friends were disgusted.   All three brothers were killed.   It would have taken us at least two days by bus.   I was lying on Monibas lap, bleeding from my head 
and left ear.   I am talking to the women Then hed say, Women are meant to 
fulfil their responsibilities in the home.   We also heard that an army brigadier 
went to prayers led by Fazlullah.   Five days after I got the award, Aunt Babo, my mothers eldest 
sister, died suddenly.   
So he put me and my brothers Khushal and Atal, then just a baby, to bed.  3 million and Davis was quickly spirited out of court 
and out of the country.   A man came near my 
mother and she took her shoe off and hit him once then twice and he ran away.   I guess he ended up 
somewhere in the middle.   Even though my father 
was not an elder or a khan, he was chosen as spokesperson as he was not afraid to speak out.   Soon our prisons were full of cases like that of a thirteenyearold 
girl who was raped and become pregnant and was then sent to prison for adultery because she 
couldnt produce four male witnesses to prove it was a crime.   The important thing is what you learn 
from it.   Dr Javid, who is an emergency care consultant at 
Queen Elizabeth Hospital, agreed, but asked to take Dr Fiona as she is from Birmingham Childrens 
Hospital and a specialist in childrens intensive care.   Blackskinned people 
are often called white and short people tall.   If anyone 
offended him, their entire family could be expelled from Swat.   What are you doing? he asked.   The troops 
blasted holes in the wall surrounding the mosque and fired mortars at the compound as helicopter 
gunships hovered overhead.   Once the 
resolutions were agreed, they were sent to officials and a handful were even acted on.   

A Funny Kind of Peace 

When my brothers schools reopened after the winter break, Khushal said he would rather stay at 
home like me.   I 
had chosen Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Benazir Bhutto and President Barack Obama.   As in much of our country, there were concrete 
blocks and checkpoints all around CMH to protect it from suicide bombers.  m.   This showed that my brain was swelling dangerously.   

The first school to be blown up was Shawar Zangay, a government girls primary school in Matta.   Look, Ziauddin, he said.   But after a while 
the school started to break even and my father began to plan a second school, which he wanted to call 
the Malala Education Academy.   They thought it was toxic, especially at 
times like this.   

It wasnt the first time.   They set up volunteer traffic police called Falcon 
Commandos, who drove through the streets with machine guns mounted on top of their pickup trucks.   A nice lady in a headscarf held my hand and said, Asalaamu alaikum which is 
our traditional Muslim greeting.   I ate a little bit of it then gave it to another girl to finish.   In my heart was the belief that God would protect 
me.   

The village was a forgotten place.   Moniba and I 
had not spoken since our fight on the last day before becoming IDPs.   The army and their 
machine guns were everywhere.   Visitors can turn up 
whenever they wish and can stay as long as they want.   They 
said the Americans always preferred dealing with dictators in Pakistan.   

A few days later, on 22 February, a permanent ceasefire was announced by Deputy 
Commissioner Syed Javid at the Swat Press Club in Mingora.   I didnt mind not going to the 
Cheena Bazaar.   If people volunteered in the same way to construct schools or roads 
or even clear the river of plastic wrappers, by God, Pakistan would become a paradise within a 
year, he said.   They even took control of 
the famous shrine of a Sufi saint, Pir Baba, which was a pilgrimage site.   The director of 
the CIA said Pakistan was either involved or incompetent.   When I saw him disappear down 
there I would cry, thinking he wouldnt come back.   

It was thrilling to see my words on the website.   I dont want you to lookback and regret not taking action 

Cutting away some of my skull sounded very drastic to my father.   

My first diary entry appeared on 3 January 2009 under the heading I am afraid : I had a terrible 
dream last night filled with military helicopters and Taliban.   
But the police did nothing to find him.   Let them be illiterate.   A stage was set 
up near Fazlullahs centre, and after going to hear him give Friday prayers, hundreds of people 
gathered to watch the floggings, shouting Allahu akbarl  God is great! with each lash.   Thats how it stayed 
from then on.   When you say it five times your street will be safe, and seven times will protect 
the whole area.   Most of the army leadership learned 
about it on TV.   

Musharraf told our people that he had no choice but to cooperate with the Americans.   Show us how you did it! we all clamoured, but he wouldnt.   
Two planes had flown into it.   

My father had resisted leaving till the end.   Later her diary was published and is a very powerful record.   By Thursday morning my father was so convinced that I would 
die that he told my uncle Faiz Mohammad that the village should start preparing for my funeral.   My valley, the Swat Valley, is a heavenly 
kingdom of mountains, gushing waterfalls and crystalclear lakes, welcome to paradise, it says on a 
sign as you enter the valley.   

His only precaution was to change his routine.   

Everyone in Swat was jubilant, but I felt the happiest because it meant school would reopen 
properly.   She looked like I imagined Shashaka, the dirty woman they told us about in tales in the village 
to make us wash.   Atal would not stop 
weeping.   

In some ways General Musharraf was very different from General Zia.   Many did, and they set off, armed with old rifles or just axes and 
bazookas.   Suddenly we could 
witness these events on television.   After this the road winds back down for a while then follows the 
Ghwurban River and peters out into a rocky track.   I could see why, when our 
people go to Karachi to work, they always want to be buried in the cool of our valley.   There 
was even a headmaster from Shangla who would boast that his greatest success was to send ten boys 
in Grade 9 for jihad training in Kashmir.   Right from the first session I think Shiza was surprised how strongwilled and 
vocal we all were.   We arranged to meet in a park, 
and I brought her Pepsi and biscuits.   

Then around 3 p.   He became a perfect talib.   Malalai went to 
the battlefield with other women from the village to tend the wounded and take them water.   Two more schools were 
blown up and three foreign aid workers from a Christian group were kidnapped as they returned to 
their base in Mingora and then murdered.   My father went to everybody he knew, asking for donations of 
food, clothing and money, and I helped my mother collect blankets.   Even in Islamabad buildings collapsed.   Inside the HQ we saw offices 
with banks of televisions, men monitoring every channel, and one officer showed my father a thick 
file of cuttings which contained every mention of the army in that days papers.   

Aba, you must give them free places at your school, I begged.   

We usually stayed in Barkana at my grandfathers house, where my father grew up.   We would sit on the 
floor around a long plastic sheet which my mother laid with food, and eat with our right hand as is our 
custom, balling together rice and meat.   

Within a few months my mother was expecting.   It was the biggest bomb ever to have gone off in our country.   Fazlullah was made 
chief of the Swat sector.   


It was school that kept me going in those dark days.   How could a notorious terrorist be hiding in Pakistan and 
remain undetected for so many years? he asked.   My father said we common people were like chaff caught 
between the two stones of a water mill.   His family became embroiled in a dispute with their cousins over 
a small plot of forest.   My father was worried.   

The streets were jampacked.   Nawaz Sharif was prime minister at 
the time and had fallen out with his army chief General Pervez Musharraf and sacked him.   In the far 
distance we could see the snows of Malam Jabba, our ski resort.   



15 

Leaving the Valley 



Leaving the valley was harder than anything I had done before.   

We spent that first night in the home of Dr Afzal.   We had been away from our valley for almost three months and as 
we drove back past 

Churchills Picket, past the ancient ruins on the hill and the giant Buddhist stupa, we saw the wide 
Swat River and my father began to weep.   Faqir had a $200,000 bounty on his head yet there 
he was sitting in a government officials house having dinner.   Individual Americans also offered to help, including Senator John 
Kerry, a rich man who had visited Pakistan many times, and Gabrielle GifTords, a congresswoman 
who had been shot in the head while meeting constituents at a shopping mall in Arizona.   Then the morning after, 
on TV, we would hear of more Taliban killings and wonder what the army was doing with all its 
booming cannons and why they could not even stop the daily broadcasts on Mullah FM.   Landslides blocked access to the worst affected 
parts and all the phones and power lines were down.   She can hear you even if you think she cant.   I was also known for 
participating in everything badminton, drama, cricket, art, even singing, though I wasnt much good.   Sindhis often talk of separation and in Baluchistan there is an ongoing 
war which gets talked about very little because it is so remote.   

When I overheard my father talking about this, I said, Why not me? I wanted people to know what 
was happening.   The 
BBC even made a recording of it using another girls voice, and I began to see that the pen and the 
words that come from it can be much more powerful than machine guns, tanks or helicopters.   

Are you scared now? I asked my father.   

My cousins made fun of me for my city ways.   I noticed my father was not very happy with this.   He ran a boys hostel in Swat and was taking 
seven or eight boys to Kohistan by coach.   Many ISI officers were close to its leaders, having known them for years, and 
shared some of their beliefs.   Then three top surgeons from the 
province came to examine me.   I wrote about being afraid to go to school because of the Taliban 
edict and looking over my shoulder all the time.   He taught theology in the government high school in 
the village of Shahpur.   Running a school is not a crime, he told them.   

I know my mother didnt like the awards because she feared I would become a target as I was 
becoming more well known.   She comes from a large 
family with three sisters and four brothers.   We dont 
want her to become shaheed millat [a martyr of the nation] like Liaquat Ali Khan.   Then an anonymous letter came to our house 
addressed to my father.   

Around the same time as our Taliban were emerging in Swat, the girls of the Red Mosque madrasa 
began terrorising the streets of Islamabad.   To me he seemed very thin and small, like a reed that 
could snap in the wind, but he was the apple of her eye, her ladla.   He raged against the Lai Masjid attack and vowed to avenge the death of Abdul Rashid.   This means cat and is her name for me.   When you want something all the universe conspires in helping you achieve 
it, it says.   The militants simply used the cash to buy more weapons and resumed 
their activities.   
Sending in the regular army was a tough decision.   One target of 



the Taliban were non governmental organisations or NGOs, which they said were antiIslam.   You have put the first stone in standing water, they 
said.   Even my name.   

They took me for another CT scan.   Amazingly three 
quarters of all the IDPs were put up by the people of Mar dan and the nearby town of Swabi.   Instead he just called himself 
Ziauddin Yousafzai, our clan name.   Archaeologists say it was almost as important as 
the Buddhas of Bamiyan, which the Afghan Taliban blew up.   

I told you last night the issue was resolved, my father replied.   
Yaseem told them he felt proud to prepare my familys food.   My own grandfather 
narrowly escaped death in the riots when his train was attacked by Hindus on his way home from 
Delhi, where he had been studying.   They even camped on the golf course, their big guns trained on 
the hillsides.   I had a thirtyyearold problem and its been resolved in one go, one man 



told my father.   We 
did another paper at school to see who would get the prize and again we got equal marks.   The Taliban bombed the power station so we had no 
electricity, then a few days later they blasted the pipeline so we had no gas either.   For some reason my 
fathers keys would not work so we found a boy who climbed over the wall and opened it from the 
inside.   Bush and to 10 Downing Street by 
Tony Blair.   

Not everyone was happy about the deal.   But 
I think that if someone kills your brother, you shouldnt kill them or their brother, you should teach 
them instead.   My father remembers that one 
day a maulana called Sufi Mohammad came to the village and asked young men to join him to fight 
the Russians in the name of Islam.   

My parents had no idea of any of these negotiations though they knew discussions were under way 
to move me overseas.   Afterwards people told him his name 
was heard on Mullah FM in a threat from Shah Douran.   Shortly 
after that we were told a man who had completed a peace walk from Dera Ismail Khan was coming 
through Mingora and we wanted to welcome him.   
If it was anything serious they would have to make the long bus journey to Mingora unless they were 
lucky enough to know someone with a car.   A khans daughter cant marry a barbers son and a 
barbers daughter cant marry a khans son.   To 
make us wash, our aunts told stories about a scary woman called Shashaka, who would come after 
you with her muddy hands and stinking breath if you didnt take a bath or wash your hair, and turn you 
into a dirty woman with hair like rats tails filled with insects.   This was a bit different when we wrote about subjects close to our hearts these 
were topics like extremism and the Taliban rather than clothes and hairstyles.   Someone who is 
against America, against the Pakistan establishment, against English law, he has been infected by the 
Taliban.   My brothers and I thought of digging a tunnel.   It felt sacred to us.   

The night before we hardly slept because we were so excited.   When my grandparents came home they were furious and beat him.   On each side of the family he had an uncle with the same affliction.   And hed been in Pakistan for more than nine years.   Dont go 
that way, he urged.   Even the Queen of England came, and stayed in the White Palace that was built from the 
same marble as the Taj Mahal by our king, the first wali of Swat.   But they 
are from different tribes so their love causes a war.   Zahid Khan was returning to his 
home from a meeting with army officials at Circuit House late at night when he was ambushed.   
My father tried to counter their propaganda but it was hard.   Instead he appeared to threaten the whole nation.   One of our favourite things 
was going on school trips.   What more would it take for the army and government to resist them? 

In Washington the government of President Obama had just announced it was sending 21,000 more 
troops to Afghanistan to turn round the war against the Taliban.   Tennis Balls and the Buddhas of Swat 



First the taliban took our music, then our Buddhas, then our history.   Then the Radio Mullah turned his attention to schools.   

We lived in Mingora, the biggest town in the valley, in fact the only city.   He was so 
angry that he made the daylong bus journey to Mingora to see the Swat minister of education.   Usually car journeys are an adventure for us children as we rarely go anywhere.   Their militants kidnapped 
policemen and ransacked government buildings.   It was as if I had been 
shot, he said.   The new partners 
again went from door to door, telling people they had started a new kind of school.   We ran outside and they 
threw toffees and tennis balls down to us, which we rushed to catch.   I have three good friends Safina 
from my area, Sumbul from the village and Moniba from school.   You saved this womans husband but not your own house! he said.   

The next day we got a lift to Abbottabad, where my grandmothers family lived.   My brothers also wanted to take their pet chickens mine had died because I washed it in 
cold water on a winters day.   

Almonds are good, he said.   But 
first we need to educate our girls so they can become teachers! 

One day Sufi Mohammad proclaimed from jail that there should be no education for women even at 
girls madrasas.   My father 
told him to go ahead, and Colonel Junaid said he would bring in Dr Mumtaz to help.   

My father longed to be eloquent with a voice that boomed out with no stammer, and he knew my 
grandfather desperately wanted him to be a doctor, but though he was a very bright student and a 
gifted poet, he was poor at maths and science and felt he was a disappointment.   Girls like me who still went to school he 
called buffaloes and sheep.   It was both odd and wonderful to see my name on a school just like my namesake 
Malalai of Maiwind, after whom so many schools in Afghanistan are named.   There was mud, mud, mud 
everywhere.   He believes he might even have thought of becoming a 
suicide bomber had there been such a thing in those days.   I took out my books one by one and just stared at them Maths, physics, Urdu, English, 
Pashto, chemistry, biology, Islamiyat, Pakistan studies.   Everything he drew became real.   .   It was a nightmare for someone trying to start a 
business and it drove Naeem to distraction.   One day my father ran into his bank manager.   

After that it is all a bit hazy.   

The way bin Laden was found was like something out of the spy movies my brother Khushal likes.   
Three children is a small family by Swati standards, where most people have seven or eight.   

On top of that, there was a stream of guests from Shangla now that my father had a place for them to 
stay.   Instead they advanced to the east and on 16 November 
captured Alpuri, the main town of Shangla.   

I also wrote about the burqa.   Our headmistress had tried to persuade her to be a school prefect but she said she couldnt 
do anything that might distract her from her studies.   As soon as she heard I had been shot she called her husband.   

When our bus was called, we ran down the steps.   When Sorayas family found out about the union they were furious.   She didnt complain food needed to be cooked and she cooked it, and there were 
others worse off than us.   There were 
condolences in every mosque.   He made bargains with God.   Yet, he brought with him a vast family tree of our clan, the Dalokhel Yousafzai, going right 
back to my great great grandfather and showing only the male line.   To my joy I found my 
school bag still packed with my books, and I gave thanks that my prayers had been answered and that 
they were safe.   He lives with us 
and has told his wife that she must observe purdah from us and that our wives must observe purdah 
from him, all in this small space.   
He began speaking against school administrators and congratulating girls by name who left school.   Few people knew where they 
were going, they just knew they had to leave.   When she heard that I had been 
hurt she was having her reading lesson with Miss Ulfat and struggling to learn words like book and 
apple.   The 
meeting started with recitations from the Chapter of Victory a surah from the Quran followed by 
speeches from different leaders in the five districts of our valley Kohistan, Malakand, Shangla, 
Upper Dir and Lower Dir.   How can a 
recording respond to live questions? 

Afterwards people congratulated me.   

Swat was one of the places most affected.   

After what happened with Safina, I vowed that I would never treat a friend badly again.   She says he didnt even notice, as he would set off early every morning after 
a breakfast of cornbread and cream, his German pistol strapped under his arm, and spend his days 
busy with local politics or resolving feuds.   It was a girl about my age.   Please dont harm my children because the God you believe in is the same God 
they pray to every day.   

I wanted to cry because I felt in my heart I might never see my home again.   He even told people how they 
should wash their private parts.   On some shelves were all the goldcoloured 
plastic cups and trophies I had won for coming first in my class.   Even 
some of the dancers of Banr Bazaar had moved back, although they were mostly making DVDs to sell, 



rather than performing live.   I walked off with two other girls she didnt 
like.   

It was while he was visiting one afternoon in September 2001 that there was a great commotion 
and other people started arriving.   They used the big hall in the mosque, where they taught more than a 
hundred children ranging from five to fifteen years old.   There was a wall 
of screens in their office.   It was simple.   That was the last time I saw him.   

That evening my father received a call from the family who had been sharing our home for the last 
eighteen months.   CMH is a large sprawling brick 
hospital with 600 beds and dates from British rule.   So most of the pictures I found 
were of his sister Fatima.   When they went in to see him he had two 
televisions on, one tuned to a local channel in Urdu and the other to Sky News in English, with news 
of my shooting.   She was under Your care and You are bound to give her 
back.   
Their children are usually dirty and they are looked down upon by Pashtuns, even if they are poor 
themselves.   That 
wasnt easy with a camera trained on me everywhere I went even as I brushed my teeth.   

For a while his Muslim identity seemed more important than anything else in his life.   Only twice had I not come top both 
times when I was beaten by my class rival Malka eNoor.   He called him his monkey.   Environmentalists had warned that our mountains had been stripped of 
trees by the Taliban and timber smugglers.   It was hard for the authorities to reach places like Shangla because 
most of the roads and bridges had gone and local government had been wiped out throughout the 
region.   

I had the run of the school as my playground.   I am confused, 
Aba, I told my father.   

Dr Javid, who was there when I was brought round, says he will never forget the look of fear and 
bewilderment on my face.   

As the day went on and the sun climbed higher in the sky, more and more of the White Mountain 
would be bathed in golden sun.   He and Hidayatullah hardly had money to pay for food, let 
alone bribes.   Madam Maryam had even got married so she could stay in Swat.   When the school opened they had just three 
students.   Look, Atal, when 
Malala is prime minister, you will be her secretary, he said.   The Taliban said girls could go to school after the peace agreement but they should be 
veiled and covered.   The most popular part of his show came every evening when he would read 
out peoples names.   

A couple of weeks after that our school was asked to take part in the District Child Assembly 
Swat, which had been set up by the charity UNICEF and by the Khpal Kor (My Home) Foundation for 
orphans.   One Talib could 
intimidate a whole village.   

I would listen rapt as he told stories of warring tribes, Pashtun leaders and saints, often through 
poems that he read in a melodious voice, crying sometimes as he read.   But my 
mother was very composed and courageous.   To represent the Taliban they had Muslim Khan, who 
wasnt in the studio.   You killed people, you slaughtered people, you beheaded 
people, you destroyed schools and still there was no protest in Pakistan.   It was Honesty is the best policy.   

It felt as though the whole country was going mad.   We saw women in the 
streets without purdah, their heads completely uncovered.   I told him that we wanted 
our schools rebuilt and a girls university in Swat.   Eid happens twice a year Eid ulFitr or Small Eid marks 
the end of the Ramadan fasting month, and Eid ulAzha or Big Eid commemorates the Prophet 
Abrahams readiness to sacrifice his son Ismail to God.   But there was no freedom of expression, and if anyone criticised the 
wali, they could be expelled from the valley.   My father told me the news when I woke up the next morning.   I noticed she had tears in her eyes.   He even asks his 
wife! they say as an insult.   Let him stay and we will cover for him 

Every day it seemed a new edict came.   

Shiza wanted to introduce us to influential people.   
The Taliban spokesman Muslim Khan then confirmed they had agreed an indefinite ceasefire.   Going to school, reading and doing our homework 
wasnt just a way of passing time, it was our future.   They had no clean water as the river was brown 
with wreckage and debris.   President Obama 
was very happy, and on TV we watched big celebrations take place outside the White House.   They were 
just waiting to be married, says my father.   He didnt want to go alone 
with the officials and insisted my mother come too.   The doctor put a hand on his shoulder and 
reassured my father that I would be taken care of and he could trust him.   On some 
mosques they set up speakers connected to radios so his broadcasts could be heard by everyone in the 
village and in the fields.   Instead he would tell his best 
students to keep their old books for my father at the end of the year and then he would be sent to their 
homes to get them.   

My father argued that all he had ever wanted was to create a school in which children could learn.   

It was a brave decision by Colonel Junaid, whose superiors were not convinced and were being 
told by other people that I should be sent abroad.   

That summer there was only one topic of conversation in my class.   He 
brought her to the hospital on the back of his motorbike, something very rare for a respectable Pashtun 
woman.   We Yousafzai (which some people spell Yusufzai or Yousufzai) are 
originally from Kandahar and are one of the biggest Pashtun tribes, spread across Pakistan and 
Afghanistan.   And if it was serious why werent they operating? He felt uncomfortable in a 
military hospital.   In the autumn chill winds would 
come.   

We felt frustrated and scared once again.   The Americans were quick as they had thousands of troops and hundreds 
of helicopters in Afghanistan so could easily fly in supplies and show they were helping us in our 
hour of need, though some crews covered the American markings on their helicopters, fearing attack.   He brought logs back from the mountains for firewood, and after 
teaching he would work in the fields where our family had a few buffaloes.   But two years after I was born the generals again took over.   He used to climb up electricity poles to hang banners advertising the school, even though 
he was so afraid of heights that when he got to the top of the ladder his feet shook.   Finally they said I was 
stable.   Attiya 
used to tease me by saying, Taliban is good, army not good.   

Around that time we moved away from where we had been living on the same street as Moniba to 
an area where I didnt have any friends.   
They were thought to be behind the terrible Mumbai massacre of 2008.   The first words I spelt out were father and country.   After the operation, first we will have recovery, then 
rehabilitation, then hold and transfer to civil authorities.   But every day she would leave behind her girl cousins playing at home and she envied them 
There seemed no point in going to school just to end up cooking, cleaning and bringing up children, so 
one day she sold her books for nine annas, spent the money on boiled sweets and never went back.   

By the end of 2008, around 400 schools had been destroyed by the Taliban.   Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham is known for 
treating British soldiers wounded in Afghanistan and Iraq.   They also said it wasnt up to us to sort 
out the problem.   My mother was worried about telling him he had a daughter 
not a son, but he says he looked into my eyes and was delighted.   Why are we here? I thought wed go to the civil hospital.   Prime Minister 
Yusuf Raza Gilani called for an inquiry and made a statement saying the flogging of the girl was 
against the teachings of Islam.   Her husband would not take her to the beach, 
and even if she had somehow slipped out of the house, she would not have been able to follow the 
signs to the sea because she could not read.   Sometimes when I 
walked along the main road I saw chalked messages on the sides of buildings, contact us for jihad 
training, they would say, listing a phone number to call.   My 
father was at the Swat Press Club for a meeting of the Association of Private Schools and had just 
gone on stage to give a speech when his mobile rang.   From there they were running 
training camps and launching raids across the border on NATO troops.   I could not sleep until he returned and I could lock the gate.   Soon everyone seemed to be talking about the radio station.   .   The boys school would reopen 
after the winter holidays but the loss of the girls school represented a big cut in our income.   A small boy was 
brought to sit on their laps to encourage the birth of a son.   
Sunni comes from the Arabic for one who follows the traditions of the Prophet.   The Taliban were known to listen at peoples doors then force their way in, 
take the TVs and smash them to pieces on the street.   He was from Mingora, and his body had been brought back for the funeral and a police 
salute.   

Wherever we lived my mother filled our house with people.   
Thats the closing shot in one part of the documentary.   

We always went to the village for the Eid holidays.   We were lucky too that Madam Maryam was 
brave and resisted the pressure to stop working.   

My fathers high school opened in 2003.   We 
were on a school trip to Marghazar, a beautiful green valley where the air is cool, and there is a tall 
mountain and a crystalclear river where we were planning to have a picnic.   At the event my father had spoken 
passionately.   
To motivate students in all provinces he was giving cash awards to girls and boys who scored well in 
their exams.   I was a girl in a land where 
rifles are fired in celebration of a son, while daughters are hidden away behind a curtain, their role in 
life simply to prepare food and give birth to children.   
The sounds in my head were not the crack, crack, crack of three bullets, but the chop, chop, chop, 
drip, drip, drip of the man severing the heads of chickens, and them dropping into the dirty street, one 
by one.   My father is so 
charismatic that Hidayatullah says he is the kind of person who, if invited to your house, will make 
friends with your friends.   There we met up 
with my cousin Khanjee, who was heading north like us.   

It was 24 July 2009, a week after our prime minister had announced that the Taliban had been 
cleared out.   I could 
listen endlessly to the story of how they met.   My grandfather and uncle used to drive my father mad, 
teasing him, Youre not as good as Sher Zaman, so much he once wished that rocks would come 
down the mountain and flatten him.   Whenever my grandmother saw me speaking on television, or 
leaving the house she would pray, Please God make Malala like Benazir Bhutto but do not give her 
Benazirs short life.   

The school was founded by my father before I was born, and on the wall above us khushal 
school was painted proudly in red and white letters.   It seemed like the whole world was outraged.   

In reality what happened was we suddenly stopped.   The previous tenants had also run a school the Ramada School.   The wait felt endless.   It was mentioned as the most inspiring in 
the closing speech, and some in the audience asked him to repeat whole stanzas and couplets, 
exclaiming Wah wah when a particular line pleased them, which is a bit like Bravo.   We worried about our family in Shangla, though my 
father said the village was too remote for the Taliban to bother with and local people had made it 
clear they would keep them out.   

Moniba, Ayesha and I also started learning about journalism from a British organisation called the 
Institute for War and Peace Reporting, which ran a project called Open Minds Pakistan.   Everyone complained about the drone attacks 
which were happening in the FATA almost every week.   My father became even more disturbed.   At that time of day Haji Baba 
Road was always a jumble of coloured rickshaws, people on foot and men on scooters, all zigzagging 
and honking.   Dont worry, we 
will sort everything out, he said.   

Then I was in class one day when my classmates said, You have won a big prize and half a 
million rupees! My father told me the government had awarded me Pakistans first ever National 
Peace Prize.   That day he had been covering a peace march led by Sufi Mohammad.   You two always argue when theres an important occasion! 
they said.   Their first child, born in 1995, was a girl and 
stillborn.   There are two powers 
in the world; one is the sword and the other is the pen.   The birds 
loved that tree.   

Naeem and my father invested their entire savings of 60,000 rupees.   My father was known 
in the family as Khaista dada, which means beautiful.   An American senator said 
that the only thing missing from bin Laden s hideaway was a neon sign .   

After that my father entered every competition in the district.   Police once tried to capture Fazlullah when he was speaking at a gathering, but a giant 
sandstorm blew up and he managed to escape.   

During Eid we went to our family village as usual.   Look instead to your own daughter.   The boys would fish using 
earthworms threaded like beads on a string hanging from a long stick.   All the other girls in my class wanted to be 
doctors, but I decided I wanted to be an inventor and make an antiTaliban machine which would sniff 
them out and destroy their guns.   Fingers were even pointed at my father.   Sufi Mohammad had been in jail since 2002 when Musharraf arrested a number of 
militant leaders after American pressure, but his organisation still continued and was being run by his 
soninlaw Maulana Fazlullah.   We took earrings, bangles and 
necklaces to decorate the bride, singing Bollywood songs as we worked.   

My friends at school said their mothers listened to the Radio Mullah although our headmistress 
Madam Maryam told us not to.   It didnt 
sound as though he had put up a fight.   Near our home was a field scattered with mysterious ruins statues of lions on 
their haunches, broken columns, headless figures and, oddest of all, hundreds of stone umbrellas.   We stayed there for a week and to my joy I 



heard Moniba was also in Abbottabad, as was one of our teachers and another friend.   We visited the Faisal Mosque at the base of the Margalla Hills, which was built by the Saudis 
for millions of rupees.   How 
can you? Rohul Amin asked, laughing.   But the pencil mark stayed stubbornly at five feet.   Even so, it all seemed far, far away from our peaceful garden valley.   I dont want keys, I want my daughter! my mother cried.   There were now 12,000 army troops in the region four 
times as many as their estimates of the Taliban along with tanks, helicopters and sophisticated 
weapons.   But also give him quiet time to ponder the eternal 
mystery of birds in the sky, bees in the sun, and the flowers on a green hillside, it says.   He told 
other boys to stop playing marbles in the dust and to play cricket instead so their clothes and hands 
wouldnt get dirty.   Every day his fellow activists came to the shack or the school for lunch.   I was on the way back to critical care after 
another CT scan, and flitted between consciousness and sleep until I woke properly.   If the school has two teachers, each 
goes in for three days and signs the other in.   I completed the paper but I knew Id made a mistake filling in the blanks.   I am only one small man 


The Autumn of the Earthquake 



One fine October day when I was still in primary school our desks started to tremble and shake.   

There was worse in store when my father went to register the school.   He didnt know why he was speaking to me in English.   There was 
no response from Muslim Khan because his phone interview had been prerecorded.   
Now listen to the sound of your lockets and bangles.   The walls were covered with photographs.   Some believed the authorities were 
deliberately encouraging the Taliban.   

Within six months people were getting rid of their TVs, DVDs and CDs.   It was the first targeted killing in Swat, and people said it was because 
he had helped the army find Taliban hideouts.   Was the deal merely an illusion? she 
wondered.   Shiza Shahid, our friend from 
Islamabad, had finished her studies in Stanford and invited twentyseven girls from the Khushal 
School to spend a few days in the capital seeing the sights and taking part in workshops to help us get 
over the trauma of living under the Taliban.   
The teachers were so happy.   We timed our prayers by the shadow on the mountains.   She was a poor mother of five who picked fruit for a 
living in a village in Punjab.   But at the 
time it was kept a secret.   



Is he right, Aba? I asked my father.   The wali administered justice, kept the peace between warring tribes and collected 
ushur a tax of ten per cent of income with which he built roads, hospitals and schools.   But it seemed they were too late.   
These were no longer just about stopping people cutting down trees but were also about education 
and democracy.   

Bin Laden and his men fled to the White Mountains of Tora Bora in eastern Afghanistan, where he 
had built a network of tunnels while fighting the Russians.   At that time talib simply meant religious 
student.   

Our army had never before gone into the FATA.   Although we had a computer, 
there were frequent power cuts and few places had Internet access.   

Shortly afterwards the mufti went to the woman who owned the school premises and said, 
Ziauddin is running a haram school in your building and bringing shame on the mohalla 
[neighbourhood].   

One day I went on Geo, which is one of the biggest news channels in our country.   What really depressed him was the looting of the destroyed schools the furniture, the 
books, the computers were all stolen by local people.   Besides, he had a family to provide for.   Look at what these 
criminals are doing to pollute our beautiful valley, he always said.   It was exam time so school 
started at nine instead of eight, which was good as I dont like getting up and can sleep through the 
crows of the cocks and the prayer calls of the muezzin.   Two days later Ayatollah 
Khomeini, the supreme leader of Iran, issued a fatwa calling for Rushdies assassination.   They said there had been a big attack on a building in New York.   I couldnt control 
myself.   As long as Fazlullah was still 
around I was afraid the Taliban would regroup and return to power.   Then they said he was badly 
injured and that they had his spokesman, Muslim Khan, in custody.   What we need to know is who imposed these militants on us, he wrote.   The 
teachers had already been evacuated as they had received threats earlier.   

I didnt see the two young men step out into the road and bring the van to a sudden halt.   
They saw Fazlullah as a kind of Robin Hood and believed that when Fazlullah took over he would 
give the khans land to the poor.   

I gave the note to my father and he was angry.   
Fazlullah exploited this ignorance.   He was told there was a problem arranging their 
passports and that for security reasons he should not even tell the rest of my family he was going.   She was big for her age but was still only thirteen.   First, lets read the book and then why not respond with 
our own book, he suggested.   We were lucky to live in a paradise like Swat with so many beautiful 
places to visit waterfalls, lakes, the ski resort, the walis palace, the Buddha statues, the tomb of 
Akhund of Swat.   

Eventually my mother interrupted him.   
Afterwards I went on as many radio and TV channels as possible.   I was happy to be with my cousin 
Sumbul, who is a year older than me.   I didnt say 
anything to my parents but whenever I went out I was afraid that Taliban with guns would leap out at 
me or throw acid in my face, as they had done to women in Afghanistan.   Pacha and his wife Jajai became his second family.   Thats what all the tubes and machines were 
monitoring.   They didnt call themselves Taliban to start with and didnt look like the 
Afghan Taliban wed seen in pictures with their turbans and blackrimmed eyes.   the local commander arrived and announced they were sending 
an army helicopter to take me and my father to Peshawar.   Few spoke out.   He had no idea how.   Even the Pakistan media, which has been so soft on you till now, is 
outraged.   So many journalists thronged to the school that day that it turned 
into a news studio.   As we skipped 
through, we cast off our head scarves like winds puffing away clouds to make way for the sun then 
ran helterskelter up the steps.   Only the radio was allowed, and all music except for 
Taliban songs was declared haram.   

My father was very impressed by Faiz Mohammad and thought he talked a lot of sense, particularly 
about wanting to end the feudal and capitalist systems in our country, where the same big families had 
controlled things for years while the poor got poorer.   

Then another teacher at our school, a maths teacher with long hair, also refused to teach girls.   People thought that he was a good interpreter of the Holy Quran and admired his 
charisma.   



General Kayani and General Ahmad Shuja Pasha, the head of ISI, were called to testify in 
parliament, something that had never happened.   Dont support Talibanisation, its inhuman.   Her hair was matted and her skin was covered in 
sores.   The nurses 
.   

Lots of women were so moved by what Fazlullah said that they gave him gold and money, 
particularly in poor villages or households where the husbands were working abroad.   But the gunfire kept us awake most nights.   Even if she is injured, just let her survive.   They 
had three children, and we liked them living with us as we all played cops and robbers on the roof.   The competition was always between me and my best friend Moniba, 
who had beautiful writing and presentation, which the examiners liked, but I knew I could beat her on 
content.   Who will reconstruct all these buildings and schools? she 
wanted to know.   

Unfortunately not many people were convinced.   

My father was again busy speaking at seminars on our troubles with the Taliban.   The back 
where we sat had no windows, just thick plastic sheeting at the sides which flapped and was too 
yellowed and dusty to see through.   To begin with 
she didnt say much in class.   Chairs had been upended and the space 
was a mess.   My mother is very devout, and to start with she liked Fazlullah.   We are told that Swat is 
being sacrificed for the sake of Pakistan, but no one and nothing should be sacrificed for the state.   She always says, I have four brothers, and if I do even the slightest thing wrong they can stop 
me going to school.   
Meanwhile the authorities, like most people, did nothing.   His friend had told him it would make far more impact 
than him roaming from pillar to post.   

For him the closing of the schools also meant the loss of business.   The odd thing was no one had even noticed the publication of the book to start 
with it wasnt actually on sale in Pakistan but then a series of articles appeared in Urdu 
newspapers by a mullah close to our intelligence service, berating the book as offensive to the 
Prophet and saying it was the duty of good Muslims to protest.   Everyone wanted me in their family as I was from Mingora and 
modern.   Look at my dark skin and look at yours ! 

We visited the White Palace and saw where the Queen had slept and the gardens of beautiful 
flowers.   He also thought armed guards would 
alarm the parents of the students at school, and he didnt want to put others at risk.   Some thought my father had done it for 
me but Madam Maryam, our principal, told them, No.   One day, as Sher Zaman and two of his brothers were on their way to the land, 
they were ambushed by his uncle and some of his men.   He made Afghanistan a rallying point not only for the West, which wanted to stop the 
spread of communism from the Soviet Union, but also for Muslims from Sudan to Tajikistan, who saw 
it as a fellow Islamic country under attack from infidels.   Moniba and I had been reading the Twilight books 
and longed to be vampires.   

My mother and father tell each other everything so Aba soon found out why I was so sad.   

Afterwards we went into the small museum at the back, which had displays of the special white 
bow ties Jinnah used to order from Paris, his threepiece suits tailored in London, his golf clubs and a 
special travelling box with drawers for twelve pairs of shoes including his favourite twotone 
brogues.   Thats what they did in Waziristan when they went after kidnappers and bandits.   We raced around, building snowmen and snow bears and trying to catch 



snowflakes.   So when Naeem lost his job after a dispute with the college 
administration, they decided to start their own school.   And now it was all to stop.   But they had 
come a long way and its hard for us as Pashtuns to refuse hospitality.   Twice bombs went off when I was in the kitchen, 
so close by that the whole house rattled and the fan above the window fell down.   This will not last, my father predicted.   In our society you have to take revenge for such slights, but my father was 
much smaller than his cousins.   I quickened my pace and after a 
while I looked back to see if he was following me.   I prayed to God every night to give me strength.   
She spent more than a year in jail before the case went to court and she was sentenced to death.   A young man came in and introduced himself as Colonel Junaid, a 
neurosurgeon.   

When nightfall came, there were still tremors and my mother was in a state of panic.   It is a very beautiful letter, full of good advice.   One hot day she had fetched water for her fellow workers but some of 
them refused to drink it, saying that the water was unclean because she was a Christian.   

It was April 2012, the month after our exams so we were all feeling relaxed.   One day I want to cross 
this sea, I said.   Instead of celebrating each other, our four 
provinces struggle to get along.   

The school had expanded a lot by then and had three buildings the original one in Landikas was a 
primary school, and then there was a high school for girls on Yahya Street and one for boys with a big 
garden of roses near the remains of the Buddhist temple.   He even asked friends to throw dried fruits, sweets and coins into my cradle, something 
we usually only do for boys.   In the next room was a soldier who had been horrifically burned in an IED attack 
and had a leg blown off.   Were she to 



break that tradition, men and women would talk against her, particularly those in our own family.   The shack had just two rooms, one where Hidayatullah and my father 
slept and one which was a small office.   What 
would Muslim Khan use instead of the stethoscope and the thermometer? my father asked.   Thirty four of our fortytwo bridges had been washed 
away, cutting off much of the valley.   I read that Benazir Bhutto insisted on wearing glass 
bangles at her wedding to set an example but the tradition of adorning the bride still continued.   

My father prayed they would agree, but my grandfather asked them as soon as they arrived, 
exhausted after the threeday bus journey, and his soninlaw refused outright.   When we were IDPs I had thought about becoming a 
politician and now I knew that was the right choice.   Another lady told me 
her son was missing.   Unfortunately, the maliks make little difference.   We believe Allah listens more closely to the 
whitehaired.   
Everyone knew she was in love with a boy, and sometimes he would pass by and she would look at 
him from under her long dark lashes, which all the girls envied.   However, he got a wealthy philanthropist, Azaday Khan, to pay 
for him to produce a leaflet asking, Kia hasool e elum in bachun ka haq nahe?  Is education not 
the right of these children? My father printed thousands of these leaflets, left them at local meetings 
and distributed them around town.   She thought I would think it strange that she hadnt come to me, 
but people told her not to go as I was either dead or about to be moved.   

His own village school had been just a small building.   

The other girls didnt agree with me.   

Next Fazlullah began holding a shura, a kind of local court.   It seemed very far away.   When the school assistants put the pans on the fire to heat up the chicken 
curry, they panicked that there was not enough food for so many girls and added water from the 
stream.   There was even a case of a man drawing a teachers pension 
when he had never taught a day in his life.   

My father tried to change his mind.   My father said this was rubbish.   

Many of our madrasas or religious schools were opened at that time, and in all schools religious 
studies, what we call deeniyat, was replaced by Islamiyat, or Islamic studies, which children in 
Pakistan still have to do today.   The Americans also 
sent helicopters, which made some people suspicious.   
In January 2007 a close friend of one of my fathers friends was kidnapped in his village by eighty 
masked gunmen.   In the name of Allah, I am dying! 

You could hear the Taliban shouting, Hold her down.   The school where Uncle Khan dada taught 
was in the mountain village of Sewoor, about an hour and a half s climb from their house.   What you are doing is wrong.  .   Fortunately another old college friend called 
Hidayatullah stepped in and agreed to put up the money and take Naeems place.   They were mostly boys 
although eleven girls from my school went along.   The only charity they know is to give to mosque and madrasa.   Sir, they are saying very bad things about our school, 
they said to my father.   The drops sparkled in the sun.   We all watched in horror.   She refused even to be 
photographed.   My mother is not 
easily scared and remained composed.   I couldnt believe it.   We dont respect 
privacy and there is no such thing as making an appointment to see someone.   

And me, her beauty, he laughs.   The destruction 
of schools continued.   But his wife and younger brother stayed inside, along with many 
students, and there were daily exchanges of gunfire between the militants and the troops outside.   They agreed to form a united front under the banner of TehrikiTalibanPakistan (TTP), or 
the Pakistan Taliban, and claimed to have 40,000 fighters between them They chose as their leader a 
man in his late thirties called Baitullah Mehsud, who had fought in Afghanistan.   One day my mother went shopping with my cousin as 
she was getting married and wanted to buy things for her wedding.   When my father went to the police they 
showed him a file on me.   No visitors could get in even when the Prime 
Minister came to see me he was not allowed inside.   They werent particularly tasty fish.   After that I spoke of my namesake, Malalai of Maiwand, who had 
strength and power equal to hundreds and thousands of brave men because her few lines of poetry 
changed everything so the British were defeated.   

At breakfast I suggested to my brothers that we should talk of peace now and not of war.   .   I knew he would not take my demands seriously so 
I didnt push very hard.   She had known my father since she was ten and they 
trusted each other completely she used to signal to him to wind up when he spoke for too long, 
which was often! 

The secret school is our silent protest, she told us.   Some of the girls also took part, but not in public.   Everything was silent, pindrop silent.   To cure a disease before 
its onset is not in accordance with sharia law, said Fazlullah on the radio.   She had never seen the sea before.   
Thats why they volunteered their young men.   People in 
Buner had always resisted the Taliban but they were ordered by the local authorities not to fight.   We 
heard they were dropping hundreds of commandos from helicopters into the mountains in the north.   



My father had had enough.   My father was alarmed how would they 
know how to deal with head wounds? But Dr Fiona assured him it had the best intensive care in 
Pakistan with stateoftheart equipment and Britishtrained doctors.   Swat seemed to be under complete military control.   He introduced himself as an Islamic reformer and an 
interpreter of the Quran.   When he left the room Maryam switched it back 
on.   I am president of the 
Global Peace Council, the spokesperson of the council of elders, the president of the Swat 
Association of Private Schools, director of my school and head of my family.   Neither the students nor the teachers were supposed to have their own opinions, and 
the owners control was so tight they even frowned upon friendship between teachers.   And I almost gave the game away in one entry when I said, My 
mother liked my pen name Gul Makai and joked to my father we should change my name .   Shangla is all mountain, mountain, 
mountain and just a small sky.   But though their sacrifice was supposed to have restored government 
control, we were still waiting for the rule of law.   They 
were keeping the cars in lines but with weapons not whistles.   Then we would put makeup 
on her face that wed taken from our mothers, dip her hands in hot limestone and soda to make them 
white, and paint her nails red with henna.   At that time I was unhappy with my family, but 
later I was grateful as it made me more independent.   They would visit 
only once a year, and usually a new baby would arrive nine months later.   

When my father was offered a place for his A Levels at Jehanzeb College, which is the best further 
education institution in Swat, my grandfather refused to pay for his living expenses.   

But she knew I had.   It seemed to me that his every wish 
was her command.   Not only was Peshawar dangerous for Westerners but after googling 
me she realised this was no ordinary case.   Their wives and children are still waiting for them I remember visiting them and feeling 
their longing.   The man chosen to be the leader or caliph was Abu Bakr, a close 
friend and adviser of the Prophet and the man he chose to lead prayers as he lay on his deathbed.   Atal had a tantrum and refused so he walked home in a huff with some of 
his friends.   That day Usman Bhai Jan had had enough and refused to let him.   

Afterwards, we found out that despite his youthful appearance he had been a neurosurgeon for 
thirteen years and was the most experienced and decorated neurosurgeon in the Pakistani army.   I had never seen them so busy before.   We needed to visit the mausoleum of 
our founder and great leader Mohammad Ali Jinnah.   They are taking salaries and have to serve 
you.   Hes not for peace; he wants more killing.   

It took them two goes to destroy it.   

Once again, another official was called to talk to him.   

Some people obviously did not like that.   There was really only one subject 9/11.   

I played mostly with Khushal because he was just two years younger than me, but we fought all the 
time.   She saw 
their men were losing, and when the flagbearer fell she lifted her white veil up high and marched 
onto the battlefield in front of the troops.   

All this happened and nobody did a thing.   We people of Swat were first seduced by the Taliban, then killed by 
them and now blamed for them.   People visited him to 
pay homage and kiss his hand because they were tired of war and suicide bombings.   Was 
it because of the cry of a woman? 

When the waters receded, they found their home and school destroyed: their furniture, carpets, 
books, clothes and the audio system entirely caked in thick foulsmelling mud.   She became a good friend of mine 
and of Monibas, which sometimes caused fights as three is a tricky number.   

Leaving our home felt like having my heart ripped out.  8 million population had left 
our valley.   

On 5 May 2009 we became IDPs.   Sharif was accused of treason and only saved by his friends in the 
Saudi royal family, who arranged his exile.   In August we had our first case of cholera in Mingora and soon there was a tent of patients 
outside the hospital.   

I liked to sit on the roof and watch the mountains and dream.   We wont give him the building but be careful.   We had been so happy, then something very bad had 
come into our lives and we were now waiting for our happy ending.   

In our province Maulana Sufi Mohammad, who had fought in Afghanistan against the Russians, 
issued a fatwa against the US.   I was 
upset and recalled how different my eleventh birthday had been.   

All of us girls made it clear that we wanted to see the Taliban brought to justice, but we werent 
very convinced this would happen.   

Soon the house was full of women.   Her grandmother my 
great grandmother was widowed when her children were young, and her eldest son Janser Khan 
was locked up because of a tribal feud with another family when he was only nine.   The army must do something for the future of the valley, not just 
focus on the military operation, I said.   Now we must wait 

I have another stupid question, said my father.   Some people, like me, get caught and vow they will never do it again.   We also have the AhleHadith 
(people of the Hadith), who are Salafists.   
Since weve come back from being IDPs we havent seen any attacks on army and police.   

When he got to the hospital only one other member of the jirga committee was there.   One of them was a maulana and my father managed to get him freed.   The temples are 
long gone, but almost anywhere you go in Swat, amid all the primroses and other wild flowers, you 
find their remains.   Look, she is responding! she said.   

My father brushed it off.   

To start with the only rescue workers who came were a few from a locally based foreign aid 
agency and volunteers from the TehrikeNifazeShariaeMohammadi (TNSM) or Movement for the 
Enforcement of Islamic Law, the group founded by Sufi Mohammad that had sent men to fight in 
Afghanistan.   It was time to get back to my 
books.   A few days later they attacked an army convoy travelling in 
the direction of Swat and killed thirteen soldiers.   



In 2002 Musharraf held elections for controlled democracy.   She said it needed to be 
checked all the time and asked a nurse why there was no arterial line.   I wont tell anyone.   My brothers loved this, and they would taunt me and my mother by pointing out the 
wreckage of vehicles on the mountainside.   There was usually a note pinned to them saying something like, This is 
what happens to an army agent, or Do not touch this body until 11 a.   

Someone has been in here, my father said as soon as we entered the courtyard.   

The school continued to lose money.   

Yes, Malala, he replied.   

I had been born into a sort of democracy in which for ten years Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif 
kept replacing each other, none of their governments ever completing a term and always accusing 
each other of corruption.   During my fathers first term at 
college national elections were held, which were won by Benazir Bhutto, daughter of the prime 
minister who had been executed when my father was a boy.   

On our short trips we forgot our troubles in Swat.   At one the 
information minister for our province said Talibanisation was the result of our countrys policy of 
training militants and sending them to Afghanistan, first to fight the Russians, then to fight the 
Americans.   He had one much older brother, Saeed Ramzan who I call 
Uncle Khan dada, and five sisters.   

The guard explained that the tomb in the main room under a giant chandelier from China did not 
contain Jinnahs body.   I was born on 12 July 1997.   What about this bone? What will you do with it? 

After three months we will put it back, replied Dr Mumtaz.   Before then mullahs had almost been figures of fun my father said at wedding parties 
they would just hang around in a corner and leave early but under Zia they became influential and 
were called to Islamabad for guidance on sermons.   

Their leader was Maulana Fazlullah, a 28yearold who used to operate the pulley chair to cross 
the Swat River and whose right leg dragged because of childhood polio.   

Among the visitors who came and were not allowed in was Rehman Malik, the interior minister.   Within a few hours of the attack, an 
influential local cleric called Faqir Mohammad, who had run the madrasa, announced that the deaths 
would be avenged by suicide bombings against Pakistani soldiers.   One of his friends had persuaded him to participate in a 
documentary for the New York Times website to show the world what was happening to us.   

My father used some of the money to buy me a new bed and cabinet and pay for tooth implants for 
my mother and a piece of land in Shangla.   My father and brothers were standing outside when a group of 
teenage Taliban went past playing victory songs on their mobiles.   They were all very enthusiastic as each one was hoping to be made the 
amir of their district so they could be in charge of imposing shariat.   We 



can pray to God.   

Finally the goahead was given and the doctors had to face the problem of how I was to be moved 



and who would pay for it.   In our culture doctors dont explain 
things to patients or relatives, and my father asked humbly, If you dont mind, I have a stupid 
question.   Malala is a genius girl, my class fellows would say.   Had they done so, he would have been electrocuted.   

Earthquake victims praised the activists who had trudged up and down mountains and through 
shattered valleys carrying medical help to remote regions no one else had bothered with.   

A man goes out to work, he earns a wage, he comes back home, he eats, he sleeps.   But Fazlullahs headquarters were just a few miles away, and 
even though the Taliban were not near our house they were in the markets, in the streets and the hills.   It 
looked like the remains of someones dinner.   He vowed to 
end corruption and go after those guilty of plundering and looting the national wealth.   My father 
went there after the bombings and found the buildings completely razed to the ground.   He palpated my spine and located the bullet lying next to my left shoulder blade.   It was late afternoon 
by the time we reached Mardan, which is a hot and busy city.   It must be 
Malala! they said.   But finally the 
deadline was upon us.   

Lunch was a disaster.   I was wheeled into a glasswalled isolation unit and a nurse 
put me on a drip.   Not a single day passes without the killing of at least one Pakistani.   But my government was reluctant to ask for fear of loss of face.   

The militants did not give up easily.   These girls should be in purdah He told her, Take this building back from him 
and I will rent it for my madrasa.   My father didnt 
know what to do.   Even though he was not a khan or a 
rich man, people listened to him.   We held an election for speaker and I won! It was strange to stand up there 
on the stage and have people address me as Madam Speaker, but it felt good to have our voices heard.   I had no idea what New York and America were.   

The first paper, on Monday, 8 October, was physics.   My feeling was that nobody can stop death; it doesnt matter if it comes from a 
talib or cancer.   They can stop us going to school 
but they cant stop us learning, I said.   

It was in Spal Bandi that my father came across women who had great freedom and were not 
hidden away as in his own village.   

For as long as I can remember my mother has talked to birds.   At school that day everyone was subdued, even those who had opposed Benazir.   

We were there one week and predictably Moniba and I quarrelled.   General Zia had promised to be in power for ninety days and had 
stayed more than eleven years until he was killed in an air crash.   If we dont, she may die.   Many of the rich fled.   Half her work in the UK was 
moving critically ill children, the other half was treating them in intensive care.   This from a man 
who had lived so long in America! He insisted he would have his own education system.   

It was after the Red Mosque siege that the Swat Taliban changed.   A girl is so sacred she should be in 
purdah, and so private that there is no ladys name in the Quran as God doesnt want her to be 
named.   But my father is an 
optimistic man and never deterred by practicalities.   I 
was different I never hid my desire when I changed from wanting to be a doctor to wanting to be an 
inventor or a politician.   Then he did a 
tracheotomy as he was worried the swelling was blocking my airway.   Our history textbooks were rewritten to describe Pakistan as a 
fortress of Islam, which made it seem as if we had existed far longer than since 1947, and 
denounced Hindus and Jews.   He was supposed to seal 
the peace deal with a speech calling for reconciliation and an end to violence.   

This wasnt just happening in Swat.   The women could not get 
information; they didnt know if their husbands and sons were dead or alive.   

As we got older the village began to seem boring.   Life isnt just about taking in oxygen and giving out carbon dioxide.   

He laughed a lot, but as a boy he had been so selfconscious about being darkskinned that he went 
to the fields to get buffalo milk to spread on his face, thinking it would make him lighter.   The plan was that Musharraf would finally take off his 
uniform and be a civilian president, supported by Benazirs party.   I was only eleven but I looked older, and the media seemed to like hearing from 
a young girl.   

I had done a lot of television interviews and enjoyed speaking into the microphone so much that my 
friends would tease me.   I was sitting on the left between Moniba and a 
girl from the year below called Shazia Ramzan, holding our exam folders to our chests and our school 
bags under our feet.   There was music all night long.   The night before the exams began I stayed up studying until three oclock in the morning and 
reread an entire textbook.   There were even 
motorbikes with entire families balanced on them.   If shed died I would have killed Pakistans 
Mother Teresa.   There were 
children in the laps of adults and smaller children in their laps.   We heard there were thousands of missing all over Pakistan.   Jinnah smoked fifty cigarettes a day.   On the steps outside an old man was selling popcorn.   Hed 
boast, Ziauddin is a shaheen  a falcon because this is a creature that flies high above other birds.   In the 
yard I hugged all my friends.   But when would that be? we continually asked ourselves.   We need to operate now to give her a 
chance, he said.   But she had never 
been in a situation quite like this.   If they killed him then I 
can put the children in an orphanage.   Even we schoolchildren know that 
ordinary diplomats dont drive around in unmarked cars carrying Glock pistols.   One day Hidayatullah came back from trying to 
enrol pupils to find my father sitting in the office talking about advertising with the local head of 
Pakistan TV As soon as the man had gone, Hidayatullah burst into laughter.   If we had not put guns in the hands of madrasa students at the behest of foreign powers 
we would not be facing this bloodbath in the tribal areas and Swat, he said.   

The other principals took paying bribes for granted, but my father argued that if all the schools 
joined together they could resist.   I drummed my fingers.   I was to be flown out of Pakistan for the first time in my life in the early hours 
of Monday, 15 October.   The man told him the shopkeeper had 
given him a photocopied letter.   The peace deal was merely 
a mirage.   I never said those things to your clerk.   
But lots of people called to congratulate him.   

It took a while for us to realise how bad it was.   She took the pink phone that Aba bought me.   They became voluntary IDPs.   There were pictures of me 
everywhere receiving the awards she had disapproved of.   My only 
ambition, he said, is to educate my children and my nation as much as I am able.   It was just one question worth only one mark, but it made me feel that 
something devastating was going to happen.   
Then he asked, Please, can you bring in Dr Mumtaz? 

How would that look? replied Colonel Junaid who was, not surprisingly, offended.   I knew these 
were very small steps.   The constant gunfire and curfews had made it impossible for the hospital to function, so he 
had moved it to Barikot.   Khaista, Pisho, Bhabi, Khushal, Atal! Then we heard sirens, one after another as if 
all the ambulances of Mingora were passing.   Some of the khans fled.   It sounded like a disease.   In truth the tribal areas are not governed at 
all.   They wanted to move me but suggested that in the 
meantime a top doctor be brought in.   My mother was sitting on the floor pounding 
spices, brightly coloured turmeric and cumin, filling the air with their aroma.   Then he took some 
gur, dark molasses made from sugar cane, and rolled it around his mouth to moisten it with spit.   
Danger began to creep closer.   Ours remained a royalblue shalwar kamiz with a white 
dupatta, or headscarf, and we were advised to keep our heads covered coming in and out of school.   They muttered about hidden hands and unseen forces.   My fathers heart sank.   They take out loans from state banks but they dont pay them back.   I wanted to see pictures of the women in his life.   My brave daughter, my beautiful daughter, she cried.   They told him that my national and international profile meant I had 
attracted attention and death threats from the Taliban and that I needed protection.   Shes alive! she shouted.   She loved him so much that she would slip him extra meat and the cream off the milk while 
she went without.   The numbers were unbelievable.   

My grandmother kept his spirits up he was her favourite and she believed great things lay in store 
for him.   Swat would be Swat just with a different justice system I wanted to believe this but I 
was worried.   Two of his children were even born in the 
Abbottabad hospital.   But 
she is like my second mother.   The next 
morning we learned that masked militants had entered the Sangota Convent School for girls and the 
Excelsior College for boys and blown them up using improvised explosive devices (IEDs).   I was reminded 
of our history lessons, in which we learned about the loot or bounty an army enjoys when a battle is 
won.   

The school was not far from my home and I used to walk, but since the start of last year I had been 
going with other girls in a rickshaw and coming home by bus.   You should have set an example.   My father didnt attend the 
gathering.   His sisters my aunts did not go to school at all, just like 
millions of girls in my country.   He took off his turban and put it in my fathers lap.   

There seemed to be so many things about which people were fighting.   Across 
the tribal areas people were angry and many joined militant groups or formed lashkars, local militias.   If you have a 
headache and tell the doctor you have a stomach ache, how can the doctor help? You must speak the 
truth.   

I tried to distract myself by reading Stephen Hawkings A Brief History of Time, which answered 
big questions such as how the universe began and whether time could run backwards.   He had studied in the 
madrasa of Maulana Sufi Mohammad, the founder of the TNSM, and married his daughter.   He 
had joined the military as a doctor because of their superior facilities, following in the footsteps of 
his uncle, who was also an army neurosurgeon.   We were disillusioned and disappointed.   

Most Pakistanis are Sunnis like us more than eighty per cent but within that we are again many 
groups.   

Whats done is done, my father insisted.   He was 
also the president of the All Swat Hotels Association, so he was particularly eager for life to go back 
to normal so that tourists could return.   
Finally we got news from a cousin.   My brother 
Khushal was now at school in Abbottabad, so it was just me, my parents and Atal.   

I could tell my father was in a bad mood.   Then we crammed in, fighting over the window seats even though the panes 
were so encrusted with dirt it was hard to see out of them The sides of Swat buses are painted with 
scenes of bright pink and yellow flowers, neonorange tigers and snowy mountains.   Dont open it, 
Malala! my father ordered.   As ever, 
they ignored me and carried on with their war games.   I didnt get 
a chance to answer their question, Who is Malala? or I would have explained to them why they 
should let us girls go to school as well as their own sisters and daughters.   

General Kayani was adamant that the Americans should not be involved because of the ongoing 
bad relations between the two countries after the Raymond Davis episode and the bin Laden raid as 
well as the killing of some Pakistani soldiers at a border post by a US helicopter.   But President Bush kept praising Musharraf, 
inviting him to Washington and calling him his buddy.   Our people dont know their exact dates of birth my mother, 
for example, does not know when she was born.   Besides he had seven other children to think about.   All the girls were singing and chatting and our voices 
bounced around inside the bus.   Our house has 
holes in the walls, and every plate and cup is cracked.   It was too narrow even for a cricket pitch and only 
one family had a television.   A couple of 
weeks after Shabanas murder, a teacher in Matta was killed when he refused to pull his shalwar 
above the ankle the way the Taliban wore theirs.   

The road up the small hill is usually busy as it is a short cut but that day it was strangely quiet.   We have no reliable electricity 
supply.   They 
believed that as Muslims they would be defiled by drinking with her.   He appealed to all Swatis to return.   At the time I had 
thought it was a stupid question, but now I saw that everything I could not imagine happening had 
happened.   It blamed citizens like us for allowing the 
Taliban to control Swat.   One was Sher Zaman, a man who had been in my fathers 
class and always got better grades than him.   The 
teachers at the Khushal School demanded something.   

There was a huge crowd between 30,000 and 40,000 people wearing turbans and singing 
Taliban and jihadi songs.   
In the town of Muzaffarabad in Azad Kashmir the JuD even set up a large field hospital with Xray 
machines, an operating theatre, a wellstocked pharmacy and a dental department.   The name was ironic and my father often 
laughed about it, but the organisations aim was serious: to preserve the environment of Swat and 
promote peace and education among local people.   Children sometimes froze to death in winter.   He 
began building a vast redbrick headquarters in Imam Deri complete with a madrasa, a mosque and 
walls and levees to protect it from the Swat River.   

The other main student organisation was Islami JamaateTalaba, the student wing of the religious 
party JamaateIslami, which was powerful in many universities in Pakistan.   

I knew that could not be true.   Jinnah said, No 
struggle can ever succeed without women participating side by side with men.   Pakistan doesnt have student loans and he had never even set foot in a bank.   

Though I had been born in a city, I shared my fathers love of nature.   When he got the job he gave his age 
as much younger than my grandfather.   Why should you be 



paying bribes? You are not running brothels; you are educating children! Government officials are not 
your bosses, he reminded them; they are your servants.   The mohajirs almost all support a party called the MQM led by 
Altaf Hussain, who lives in exile in London and communicates with his people by Skype.   Almost two million of them were killed trying to cross the new border.   We Pashtuns cannot turn away relatives or friends, however inconvenient.   Sufi Mohammad didnt do what he should have done.   It was the peach and onion season and farmers were desperate to save their 
harvests.   

Once the shaking had stopped we were all sent home.   

My mother was in a state of shock and could not understand why the doctors were not operating to 
remove the bullet.   The only television was in the hujra of one of 
the wealthier families, and no one had a computer.   Cases such 
as land disputes, common in our area, which used to be resolved quickly now took ten years to come 
to court.   Thats how we think of each other.   
In a city of twenty million people is there not one person who will take this down? 

There was one important place we had to include in our visit to Karachi besides our outings to the 
sea or the huge bazaars, where my mother bought lots of clothes.   My relatives would ask me, Would you like to cook chicken for us? and Id 
say, No, the chicken is innocent.   On Thursday morning one of the specialists, 
Brigadier Aslam, called Dr Fiona.   

There was also Nooria, whose mother Kharoo did some of our washing and cleaning, and Alishpa, 
one of the daughters of Khalida, the woman who helped my mother with the cooking.   We 
were supposed to be allies and we had lost more soldiers in their War on Terror than they had.   When he was a child he thought this small valley 
was the entire world and that if anyone went beyond the point where either mountain kissed the sky, 
they would fall off.   But we 
knew that was not true.   

As soon as we landed in Rawalpindi we were taken by ambulance with another military escort to a 
hospital called the Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology.   
Now we had become the valley of sorrows, said my cousin Sultan Rome.   Three Bullets 



Sir de pa lowara tega kegda 

Praday watan de paki nishta balakhtona 

O Wayfarer! Rest your head on the stony cobblestone 
It is a foreign land not the city of your kings! 



16 

The Valley of Sorrows 



It all seemed like a bad dream.   If shes on her own with two boys 
in Mingora, anything could happen to them! 

My father called the colonel.   Hidayatullah laughed.   We have lost so many of the precious lives of our soldiers and this is due to 
your negligence.   

After the threats against me my mother didnt like me walking anywhere and insisted I get a rickshaw 
to school and take the bus home even though it was only a fiveminute walk.   My father organised one of the festivals in Marghazar and invited those who had hosted the 
IDPs in the lower districts as a thank you.   He needed to remove some of my skull to give the brain space to 
expand, otherwise the pressure would become unbearable.   The crowds were so large that the bus moved at a walking pace.   My father also saw the book as offensive to Islam 
but believes strongly in freedom of speech.   

My brothers immediately rushed off to check on their pet chickens.   So he called my cousin to take him.   
The riverside hotels and restaurants where tourists used to eat trout and enjoy the views were all 
destroyed.   

When we arrived back at school after Eid, we saw a letter taped to the gate.   But now Im neither a widow nor a wife.   The Taliban set up shariat courts in all districts and 
broadcast sermons from mosques calling on the local youth to join them 

Just as they had in Swat, they burned TV sets, pictures, DVDs and tapes.   When it suits the Taliban, women can be vocal and visible.   The CT scan shows the 
bullet went very close to the brain He said particles of bone had damaged the brain membrane.   There were also giant posters pasted on the front of the mosque with the 
same accusations.   Musicians took out adverts in the papers saying they had stopped playing and 
were pledging to live pious lives to appease the Taliban.   My father wanted us to be inspired by our 
great hero, but in a manner fit for our times with pens, not swords.   Why are you like this? 
I asked.   Luckily, a neighbour called Mr Amanuddin took them in 
for the night.   Some of us spoke out against what was happening in our valley.   At one point we were stopped by the army, who told us we could go no further 
and must turn back.   Dont you think she is meant for the skies? Fathers 
can be very embarrassing.   

Fazlullahs group was not the only one causing havoc.   

My mother and her friends were upset about not being able to go shopping, particularly in the days 
before the Eid holidays, when we beautify ourselves and go to the stalls lit up by fairy lights that sell 
bangles and henna.   Then they captured 
the airport and in a week they had taken back the city.   All the principals from the 
meeting had arrived at the hospital and there were scores of media and activists; it seemed the whole 
town was there.   I was one of the three shortest girls in my class of thirty.   We were a group of 
about seventy girls.   What they did was like our traditional jirgas the 
Americans paid blood money amounting to $2.   As a boy 
in Karachi he would study by the glow of street lights because there was no light at home.   In a short 
time they had taken over fiftynine villages and set up their own parallel administrations.   They 
retreated after just twelve days and reached what they called a negotiated peace settlement with 
local militant leaders like Nek Mohammad.   He told us that the last part of the journey had 
been very difficult.   People often said the Taliban might kill my father but not me.   She had not been at 
school that day but at home nursing her baby when she received a phone call from her brotherinlaw 
checking she was safe.   Did all this fighting mean we needed 
to divide our country yet again? 

When we left the museum some young men with flags were protesting outside.   He 
had been shot several times and his throat partly slit.   There was little to do.   
But all this time the mufti was watching.   They had no power, as all their makeshift 
hydroelectric projects had been smashed to pieces.   He tried to talk to them but they ran away.   We carried 
out this attack, and anybody who speaks against us will be attacked in the same way, said Ehsanullah 
Ehsan, a spokesman for the TTR Malala has been targeted because of her pioneer role in preaching 
secularism .   My father had hired three Flying 
Coaches but we could not all fit in, so five of us me, Moniba and three other girls were in the 
dyna, the school van.   I wanted to go to Shangla with my father and the trucks but 
he told me it would be too dangerous.   She was the only girl in a 
class of boys.   It seemed to 
him that everyone must know who was inside.   

Our week at the guesthouse soon ended and we went to Haripur, where one of my aunts lived.   My mother cried, but my father tried to comfort her as he felt I 
was now out of danger.   Sometimes his men would display the fancy clothes that they said they had taken from 
decadent women to shame them.   My mother took me to say sorry to Safina and 
her parents.   Within an hour of the announcement on television of Musharraf s sacking, tanks were on the 
streets and troops had taken over the newsrooms and the airports.   Nobody remembered.   Two hours ago, came the reply.   Of course this only applied to the men; women in 
our area dont vote.   I was the one who would help other pupils 
who had difficulties.   

The most important part of the mock wedding was jewellery.   We had a new 
government under President Asif Zardari, the widower of Benazir, but they didnt seem to care about 
Swat.   Our army, which already had a lot of strange side businesses, like factories making 
cornflakes and fertilisers, had started producing soap operas.   So at first we thought we were in danger.   
Occasionally I made a low grunt and moved my hand or fluttered my eyes.   The Americans were worried the deal meant surrender.   In our culture women are 
expected not to mix with men they are not related to.   They wanted my fathers help.   I was cross.   So far we had driven in the opposite direction, but we had had to take the only lift we could 
get out of Swat.   Our friend Shiza and some of the activists we had met in Islamabad came to 
Mingora and distributed lots of money.   One of my fathers friends 
phoned her to tell her I was being taken to Peshawar by helicopter and she should come by road.   So they decided to set up an Englishlanguage school in Mingora, thinking that 
since Swat was a tourist destination there would be a demand for learning in English.   

My father shares everything with my mother and there was no way he would keep such a thing 
secret.   One of them was her neighbour, 
who was angry because she said Asia Bibis goat had damaged her water trough.   Your school bus has been fired 
on, he whispered urgently to my father.   Instead of Zias 
Islamisation he began what he called enlightened moderation.   

My uncle was more dutiful.   As a teacher he was 
eligible for a discount on his sons school fees for sports and joining the Boy Scouts.   Sometimes I would mimic the teachers.   Its a big question for the army and administration.   Baitullah denied responsibility, which was unusual for the Taliban.   He was said to be more moderate than his soninlaw Fazlullah, and there was hope that he 
would make a peace deal with the government to impose sharia law in Swat and release us from 
Taliban violence.   

When I was put in the ambulance my father was afraid the Taliban would attack again.   My 
parents first child was stillborn but I popped out kicking and screaming.   Usually I liked exams as a chance to show what I could do.   This is my number, call me.   She lived in Banr Bazaar, a narrow 
street in our town of Mingora which is famous for its dancers and musicians.   They 
slaughter goats and eat with pleasure.   The consolation this time, however, was that there was no radio to spread this message! 

While all this suffering was going on, while people were losing their loved ones, their homes and 
their livelihoods, our president, Asif Zardari, was on holiday at a chateau in France.   

Fazlullah himself was still at large.   Fazlullah could now carry out his threats and mobilise support 
for his Taliban in the name of Lai Masjid.   
Shiza introduced us to women who were lawyers and doctors and also activists, which showed us 
that women could do important jobs yet still keep their culture and traditions.   The groups main objective 
was to liberate Kashmirs Muslims from Indian rule, but they had recently also become active in 
Afghanistan.   Where did you get 
that? I asked.   As I threw the rubbish on the mountain of rotting food, I saw something 
move and I jumped.   Isnt it a miracle you all 
happened to be here when Malala was shot? said my father.   Dr Fiona 
is right because the nurses put eye drops in Malalas eyes.   The main road to 
our village from Alpuri, the capital of Shangla, had been washed away, and entire villages were 
submerged.   Then we played 
mango mango, where you make a circle and sing, then when the song stops everyone has to freeze.   They provided free 
textbooks and grants to students but held deeply intolerant views and their favourite pastime was to 
patrol universities and sabotage music concerts.   He didnt tell the Taliban to lay down their arms and 
leave the hujras.   Her own nurses from 
Birmingham were there waiting and had explained to the cardiology nurses the specific procedures 
for dealing with head injuries.   He then wrote a letter to the Daily Azadi, our local 
newspaper.   Soon mullahs all over Pakistan were 
denouncing the book, calling for it to be banned, and angry demonstrations were held.   One black day they even dynamited 
the face of the Jehanabad Buddha, which was carved into a hillside just half an hours drive from 
Mingora and towered twentythree feet into the sky.   But he refused to be silent.   The highest mountain of all is the 
pyramid shaped Mount Elum To us its a sacred mountain and so high that it always wears a 
necklace of fleecy clouds.  30 a.   They had to pay a fine they could 
not afford.   Another little girl cried, saying she wanted to ride there too.   I remembered what my father had said about taking a deep breath before starting, but then I 
saw that all eyes were on me and I rushed through.   Im no less than Malala.   

That same week our maths teacher Miss Shazia arrived at school in a hysterical state.   And Excelsior is only coeducational in the primary section 

Muslim Khan didnt answer.   
Anyone who sides with the government against us will die at our hands, he said.   I wanted to start an education foundation.   Then I 
would check all the rooms, one by one.   

Yet my father remained hopeful and believed there would be a day when there was an end to the 
destruction.   Then 
his nephew Aziz, who had come to help, raised the Pakistan flag.   
Fazlullah retreated into the mountains.   

Then on 1 December 2009 there was a suicide attack on a wellknown local ANP politician and 
member of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa assembly, Dr Shamsher Ali Khan.   I had 
been put into an induced coma, my vital signs were deteriorating, my face and body were swollen and 
my kidneys and lungs failing.   He joked to my father that if either of them had relatives 
to stay, they should pay a fine.   He had given a press conference in Peshawar demanding that the 
military act against the Taliban and go after their commanders.   I began to think that maybe I should go to Peshawar or abroad or maybe I could ask our 
teachers to form a secret school in our home, as some Afghans had done during Taliban rule.   How could something like that happen in our capital city and in a mosque? A 
mosque is a sacred place for us.   My grandmother said, Benazir will 
become shaheed, meaning she would die an honourable death.   It seemed like the Taliban didnt want us to do 
anything.   

One day I saw my little brother Atal digging furiously in the garden.   My father kept trying to persuade Naeem s friends and family to stay so 
he could be fined too! 

After three months Naeem had had enough.   The rest of Pakistan was preoccupied with 
something else the Taliban had moved right into the heart of our nations capital, Islamabad.   

Fazlullahs men patrolled the streets looking for offenders against his decrees just like the Taliban 
morality police we had heard about in Afghanistan.   It was as if everyone had been waiting for 
someone else to start.   We all started crying and praying for 
her.   Then the colonel called my father into his office, where he had 
the scans up on a screen.   He 
had been living in a large walled compound less than a mile from our military academy.   In some places, 
when the helicopters flew in the locals all rushed underneath them, which meant they could not drop 
supplies safely.   Hundreds of CD and DVD shops closed voluntarily and their owners were 
paid compensation by the Taliban.   

My mother gave them tea and food but that wasnt why they came.   Besides, my father knew this 
could be our megaphone to the outside world.   

The hospital had been put on complete lockdown.   We visited the Lok Virsa 
museum, and it was a joy to celebrate our national heritage once again.   The Quran says we should seek knowledge, 
study hard and learn the mysteries of our world.   Its actually the largest Pashtun city in 
the world, even though its far from our lands; between five and seven million Pashtuns have gone 



there to work.   He has 
come to see you.   

My mother was excited to be in Mingora.   There was 
so much damage that it cost my father 90,000 rupees to repair equivalent to the monthly fees for 
ninety students.   I read a poem 
about working hard to achieve your hearts desires.   Some of the richer parents 
took their children out of the school when they realised they were sharing classrooms with the sons 
and daughters of people who cleaned their houses or stitched their clothes.   Our own street was on a hill so we were a bit better protected from the overflowing river, but 
we shivered at the sound of it, a growling, heavybreathing dragon devouring everything in its path.   

The next day he went on a live show on the Voice of America and angrily condemned the attacks.   I was on the way to meet him with my parents when 
we were approached by a short man who was frantically talking on two different phones.   But I had never done anything like this.   

The next day we heard that the school had been flooded.   Zahid Khan 
was bleeding so much it was as if his white beard was bathed in red.   She had a little money of her own so they 
used it to hire a van and she moved to Mingora.   My father wrote a poem, The 
Relics of Butkara, which summed up perfectly how temple and mosque could exist side by side: 
When the voice of truth rises from the minarets,/ The Buddha smiles,/ And the broken chain of 
history reconnects.   Madam Maryam had brought her baby boy and Hannah, her twoyearold, who looked like a 
little doll but was full of mischief.   We will all follow in a few 
days when the documents are sorted out.   We called them chaqwartee.   There was a major problem, however.   In high school I read some Sherlock Holmes and laughed to see that this was the same battle 
where Dr Watson was wounded before becoming partner to the great detective.   

Dont! I dont want to get my clothes wet! I pleaded.   She was also our only political 
leader to speak out against the militants and even offered to help American troops hunt for bin Laden 
inside Pakistani borders.   We all ran down the steps.   Some of the students at the two madrasas 
were from Swat.   But I was 
used to speaking in public so I came out and in front of all the boys I recited one naat, a poem in 
which I praised the Prophet.   He gets so emotional you 
would think the events had happened just the night before, not more than 1,300 years ago.   We had played together as children and later he told me he was in love with me.   

No one I knew had been to Islamabad.   That first year they had boys and girls together, but by 
2004 the climate had changed so it was unthinkable to have girls and boys in the same class.   Once we were settled I started going to school with her.   She was then furious when she learned that my father did not get a good 
price for them.   Dont kill 
me! Then shots rang out and her bulletridden body was dragged to Green Chowk.   While some papers described me as a peace icon, others carried the usual conspiracy 
theories, some bloggers even questioning if I had really been shot.   

Sufi Mohammad was sitting on the stage with a long queue of people waiting to pay homage.   In our Islamic studies class at school we used to write 
essays entitled How the Prophet Lived.  30 a.   

Our people say it is a good system, and our crime rate is much lower than in nonPashtun areas.   
On the way he saw smoke so high it touched the clouds, the blackest smoke hed ever seen.   
They appeared in groups, armed with knives and Kalashnikovs, and first emerged in Upper Swat, in 
the hilly areas of Matta.   Moniba had the most beautiful 
writing and presentation of the three of us, but I always told her she did not trust herself enough.   He even dared to enter the Radio Mullahs own village one day to speak at a school.   The only way to cross the river is by rope bridges 
or on a pulley system by which people swing themselves across in a metal box.   It was there I spent my 
twelfth birthday.   A 


At school my father organised a peace march and encouraged us to speak out against what was 
happening.   They glimpsed enough of each other to 
know they liked one another, but for us it is taboo to express such things.   In colonial times our 
kings owed allegiance to the British but ruled their own land.   The anger wasnt just in Pakistan.   Then as evening came it fell in shadow as the sun moved up the Black 
Mountain.   

We were all at home that morning.   The children sang for me and I was presented with a painting of me looking 
up at the sky.   We ran up the steps anticipating the worst.   
To avoid detection he used human couriers rather than phone calls or emails.   When I was in the street it felt as though every 
man I passed might be a talib.   

Unlike my father, I took precautions.   I am representing the Ulema and Tablighian and Taliban, Mullah Ghulamullah 
said, referring to not just one but two organisations of Muslim scholars to give himself gravitas.   Theyre just like our politicians they talk the talk but they wont do anything, Id 
said.   

Sometimes his voice was reasonable, like when adults are trying to persuade you to do something 
you dont want to, and sometimes it was scary and full of fire.   We were all horrified by the attack and 
people swore revenge.   In our house my mother managed everything because my father was so busy.   Every channel was showing footage of me with a commentary of prayers and moving poems as if I 
had died.   We were grateful to the army but 
couldnt understand why they were still everywhere, in machinegun nests on roofs and manning 
checkpoints.   Even in summer its frosted with snow.   The only 
targets now are peacebuilders and civilians.   On top 
of some of the peaks were ruins where vultures circled, the remains of forts built by the first wali.   Khalid Sheikh Mohammad, the mastermind of 9/ 1 1 , was found in a house just a mile 
from the army chief s official residence in Rawalpindi.   By nightfall on 10 July, when 
the siege was finally over, around a hundred people had been killed including several soldiers and a 
number of children.   
Sometimes it felt as though it was all about the money.   After that I doublechecked all the locks every night.   It was always our 
mother who shopped for our clothes and took us to hospital if we were ill, even though in our culture, 
particularly for those of us from villages, a woman is not supposed to do these things alone.   Others said that the flogging had taken place in 
January, before the peace deal, and had been released now to sabotage it.   People used to say both Zahid Khan and my father were on the 
Taliban radar and both would be killed; the only thing they didnt know was which would be killed 
first.   But the girls of Swat are not afraid of anyone.   

It was very emotional to see him again.   My palms were sweating and my 
mouth was as dry as paper.   He had asked for my fathers advice.   His teachers and friends tried to dissuade him and his father was 
reluctant to write the speech for him.   It is a Hadith of the Holy Prophet 
that if you see something bad or evil you should stop it with your own hand.   Some people say I will never return home but I believe firmly in 
my heart that I will.   The road left the river and wound 
up through narrow passes over steep firclad heights, higher and higher, until our ears popped.   My 
father fired him, but some other teachers were worried and sent a delegation to his office.   I had moved my arms.   One girl felt my neck for a pulse.   Drip, drip, drip.   Are you my friend or Ridas? I asked Moniba.   Who is in charge here the government or Fazlullah? 

But we still believed in peace.   We enjoyed peace festivals with music and dancing, unheard of under the 
Taliban.   He and his family were going so they offered us a lift.   Baba had beautiful handwriting 
and my father would spend hours painstakingly drawing letters but Baba never once praised him.   I think when there is a great disaster or our lives are in danger we remember our 
sins and wonder how we will meet God and whether we will be forgiven.   

Zahid Khan was in hospital for twelve days then at home recuperating for a month after having 
plastic surgery to repair his nose.   He was starting to lose hope.   It was my 
mother who would wake up early in the morning, iron our school clothes, make our breakfast and 
teach us how to behave.   They wouldnt put drops in if there was no 
chance.   What are you doing? he would ask.   The hospital was 
only five minutes away.   

I had decided very early I would not be like that.   I thought, Surely how the system works depends on the people overseeing it? The 
Taliban.   This verse was recited by the prophet 
Yunus when he was in the tummy of the whale.   He had spoken at an event to commemorate the 
third anniversary of the bombing of the Haji Baba High School.   Yes, OK.   

We stayed in my mothers village, Karshat, with my uncle Faiz Mohammad and his family.   I shivered when he told me such things.   

She laughed and said, We are all three good friends.   

Malala was a lucky girl, says Hidayatullah.   God, I entrust her to You, she said to the heavens.   The helipad was only a mile away, a fiveminute drive, 
but he was scared the whole way.   There were 
two families in our village he could not convince.   We soon saw what he meant.   

After my school closed down I continued to write the blog.   

My father knew what he was referring to.   What we didnt know then was that bin Laden came to 
Swat and stayed in a remote village for a year, taking advantage of the Pashtunwali hospitality code.   On the night of 7 October 2008 we heard a series of faraway blasts.   Eucalyptus blossom blew into the house, 
coating everything white, and the wind carried the pungent smell of the rice fields.   Maryams family was not happy 
about this as she was still nursing her baby boy, who had recently undergone a small operation.   But they heard nothing.   

I cant say that was the worst day.   Very 



quickly the Taliban controlled most of Swat outside Mingora.   In Pakistan we had had a woman prime minister and in Islamabad I had met those impressive 
working women, yet the fact was that we were a country where almost all the women depend entirely 
on men.   Atal suggested we buy them nappies! In the end 



we left them with a lot of water and corn.   They wore black badges which said 
shariat ya shahadat sharia law or martyrdom and sometimes black turbans, so people 
called them Tor Patki or the Black Turbaned Brigade.   The siege went on until late on 9 July, 
when the commander of the special forces outside was killed by a sniper in one of the minarets.   I shouted at him so 
angrily that he stopped.   I will use it to make everyone happy As soon as I finished praying, I would check the 
drawer.   Water running from every tap, hot or 
cold as you wish; lights at the flick of a switch, day and night, no need for oil lamps; ovens to cook on 
that dont need anyone to go and fetch gas cylinders from the bazaar.   There are many stories that Lord Buddha himself came here because it is a 
place of such peace, and some of his ashes are said to be buried in the valley in a giant stupa.   One night the Taliban held what we call a flag march near our street and patrolled the roads 
with guns and sticks as if they were the army.   We will defeat the forces 
of extremism and militancy with the power of the people, she declared to loud cheers.   One of the worst things about that period was when we started to 
doubt one another.   That was tough and dangerous work, and the coffins of 
those killed in accidents would come back several times a year.   It was my grandmothers 
faith in my father that gave him the courage to find his own proud path he could travel along.   But the second time they will steal 
something bigger and the third something bigger still.   
Malala swung in that cradle, he said.   

Dr Javid had known this was coming.   But when you banned girls 
education people spoke out.   The women would gather 
at the house of the dead mans wife or mother and a terrible wailing would start and echo round the 
valley, which made my skin crawl.   Mingora was expanding quickly around 175,000 
people now called it home and our oncefresh air was becoming very polluted from all the vehicles 
and cooking fires.   Many of those killed 
were children who like me had been at school that morning.   When General Abbas came in we all stood up.   Our teachers and my parents were there too.   I wished their outrage extended to the Talibans banning of girls education.   In olden times Swat was called Uddyana, which means garden.   We call our village Shahpur, but really there is a necklace of three villages along the bottom 
of the valley Shahpur, the biggest; Barkana, where my father grew up; and Karshat, which is where 
my mother lived.   Go and ask the manager of the White Palace Hotel and 
he will tell you what these girls did .   
He used to read by the light of the oil lamp in the hujra, and one evening he went to sleep and the oil 
lamp fell over.   The other girls all covered their heads before 
emerging from the door and climbing up into the back.   They had been locked in a feud for so long no one 
even seemed to remember how it had started probably some small slight as we are a hotheaded 
people.   
It was cramped with twenty girls and three teachers.   Fazlullah denounced Pakistani government officials as 
infidels and said they were opposed to bringing in sharia law.   

Our words were like the eucalyptus blossoms of spring tossed away on the wind.   I spoke of the irony 
of the Taliban wanting female teachers and doctors for women yet not letting girls go to school to 
qualify for these jobs.   They escaped through these and over the 
mountains into Kurram, another tribal agency.   

Fortunately the Taliban had disappeared.   

Dr Afzal did not live far from us, so once we were safely home, my father insisted on going back 



with him in case he was targeted by the Taliban.   We breathed it into our lungs greedily.   To be torn from the country that you love is not something to wish on anyone.   

I had never written a diary before and didnt know how to begin.   One of the fruit pickers reported her to the local imam, who informed the police.   

It took weeks of back and forth between Washington and Islamabad, or rather army headquarters in 
Rawalpindi, before the case was finally resolved.   This was 
different and very much like the holidays we read about in novels.   When he became army 
chief the first thing General Kayani did was improve housing, food rations and education for ordinary 
soldiers rather than officers.   She even helped whitewash the school walls, holding up the lanterns so they could paint 
when the light went off in power cuts.   But whats happening 
is not simple, and the more you want to understand the more complex it becomes.   For Gods sake be careful, he warned.   But they were so 
captivated by the beauty of Swat they instead decided to stay there and forced the other tribes out.   It can be taken by killing any male member of the attackers 
family.   

The people in Sewoor were Gujars, Kohistanis and Mians.   But he had been lucky.   

We were all at risk from a Taliban attack.   
Sahib, he told him, I have a cousin who is ten years older than me and you have certified him ten 
years younger.   My father laughed and said I should go into politics.   He tried desperately not to think about the treacherous consonants lying 
ahead of him, just waiting to trip him up and stick in his throat, but when he spoke, the words came 
out fluently like beautiful butterflies taking flight.   

The army action at the end of 2007 had not got rid of the Taliban.   My grandmother started 
crying and saying her life had never been so bad.   Sometimes we covered our ears or buried our heads under 
pillows, but the guns were close by and the noise was too loud to block out.   But he said not to go would be cowardly.   But I had no idea where 
I was.   

The road was heaving with traffic.   There was the one about people of all 
religions being free to worship in the new Pakistan.   
Stop this or you will be in trouble and your children will weep and cry for you It was signed, 
Fedayeen of Islam.   The worst thing that can happen to a Pashtun is loss of face.   I knew my mother was still mourning my aunt and they had been feeling uneasy 
about me receiving so many awards, but it seemed to be about more than that.   Once she was ready, the bride would start crying and we 
would stroke her hair and try to convince her not to worry.   They were strange elections as the main 
party leaders Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto were in exile.   But a few months later he 
was cleared.   

That night my father spoke on Geo TV and told Kamran Khan that people had had high hopes but 
were disappointed.   When we learned she was dead, my heart said to me, Why don t you go there and fight for 
women s rights? We were looking forward to democracy and now people asked, If Benazir can die, 
nobody is safe.   It could hardly have been a 
bloodier beginning.   He opened up our media, allowing 
new private TV channels and female newsreaders, as well as showing dancing on television.   Its my duty to 
do so.   My father tells me even before I could talk I would 
toddle into classes and talk as if I was a teacher.   If we advertise we wont be able to watch it.   I went and 
looked at my uniform, happy that I would soon be able to wear it openly.   We had no clean water and no 
electricity.   

My father started teasing Atal, who was eight by then and cheekier than ever.   We decided to spend the rest of the money on people who 
needed help.   It was around 1 1 p.   Instead we spoke 
into a microphone in our classrooms and our voices were then projected into the main hall.   My father also kept telling them to hide the cameras.   I wished I had her whitelily skin, fine features and green 
eyes, but instead had inherited the sallow complexion, wide nose and brown eyes of my father.   And we were learning how powerful we are when we speak.   The point is we are a Taliban state.   But once inside he 



was told, We need someone to get blood from the blood bank.   

That first morning, just a few hours after my operation, there was suddenly a flurry of activity, people 
neatening their uniforms and clearing up.   Turning to the group, he said, When this 
gentleman passes me on the street, I look to him and greet him but he doesnt answer, he just bows his 
head.   The fruit of our apricot tree might be eaten by someone else 
this year.   Was I still Malala? 

My head was aching so much that even the injections they gave me couldnt stop the pain.   He told them they would have their reward in the hereafter.   Most of the 
time they hid their faces.   I was in my cousins car, and as we drove 
through a river where the road had been washed away we had to stop at a Taliban checkpoint.   Khushal had a toy helicopter and Atal a pistol 
made of paper, and one would shout, Fire! and the other, Take position I didnt care.   

On 17 June 2004 an unmanned Predator dropped a Hellfire missile on Nek Mohammad in South 
Waziristan apparently while he was giving an interview by satellite phone.   There are still many pictures of 
him around.   

We drove out of the bazaar, past the grinning red mouth signs for dentists, the carts stacked with 
wooden cages crammed with beadyeyed white chickens with scarlet beaks, and jewellery stores 
with windows full of gold wedding bangles.   I like to 
mimic people, and in breaks my friends used to beg me to impersonate our teachers, particularly Sir 
Obaidullah.   

My father was taking a short break from the intensity of the operating theatre and was standing 
outside when a nurse approached him.   Fazlullah hated the Bollywood movies we so 
loved, which he denounced as unIslamic.   The city was silent and emptied of people and 
traffic as if a plague had descended.   They had travelled from all over the country and many of them 
were carrying small children.   Because of the curfew and the checkpoints there was not one other 
vehicle on the road that didnt belong to the military.   It was run by 
two brothers, Abdul Aziz and Abdul Rashid, and had become a centre for spreading propaganda 
about bin Laden whom Abdul Rashid had met in Kandahar when visiting Mullah Omar.   It was all your fault, she told me.   Mehboob told us that his uncle had been on his way to isha prayers, the last prayers of the day, 
at the mosque on the street near his house when he was shot in the face.   



My fathers friend Ahmad Shah called it a controlled peace, not a durable peace.   

The only practice wed had was reading out poems at morning assembly, but there was an older 
girl at school called Fatima who was a very good speaker.   Maybe they had even shot at people through that hole.   That night 
when he went back to the army hostel, he took the passport from his pocket and gave it to my mother.   The Taliban then took two police stations in 
Khwazakhela and moved on to Madyan, where more police officers gave up their weapons.   He wanted to make sure no one was pressuring him 

My wife told me, You cant leave us, my father said.   Eighty people were killed including boys 
as young as twelve, some of whom had come from Swat.   For a while my father did this but stopped 
when he realised that although a falcon flies high it is a cruel bird.   Terror had made people 
cruel.   My father would get angry sometimes he 
would arrive home at lunchtime and call out, Tor Pekai, Im home! only to find she was out and 
there was no lunch for him Then he would find she was at the hospital visiting someone who was ill, 
or had gone to help a family, so he could not stay cross.   I meet my best friend 
Moniba and we sit together, talking and joking as if I had never left.   In my country too many politicians think nothing 
of stealing.   He and his fellow activists were holding endless meetings.   We said OK, if thats what you want, as long as we can live our lives.   
Muslim Khan, the Taliban spokesman, was on the phone.   The army say there is peace, said my father.   Our American allies were furious.   

In Mardan there were already big camps of white UNHCR tents like those for Afghan refugees in 
Peshawar.   The school was doing well, and my father was building an 
impressive reception with an arched entrance in the boys high school.   My father said later, I cant explain 
it.   Our 
biggest intelligence service belongs to the military and is called the ISI.   They would stop us but seemed unaware of each others 
presence.   Helicopters were a rare sight in 
Swat, but since our house was close to the local army headquarters they sometimes flew right over us.   
This was the war I was going to fight.   They were waiting 
for you to come clean but you just kept on.   Ten members of Monibas family were there and 
were either killed or injured.   Everyone believed the Taliban 
would return to Shangla so they couldnt understand why we hadnt remained in Mardan.   The brothers 
were famed for their fiery sermons and attracted thousands of worshippers, particularly after 9/11.   We just 
knew my father didnt want us there, said my father.   And we saw the 
sights.  m when the surgeons came out.   

When Colonel Junaid came to check on me, my father again asked him, Will she survive? 

Do you believe in God? the doctor asked him.   Go away! 

The mufti had failed to close our school but his interference was an indication of how our country 
was changing.   Shazia had been hit twice, in the left collarbone and palm, and had been 
brought to the hospital with me.   I was still 
trying to get my head round the fact that she had been living in the seaside city of Karachi for thirty 
years and yet had never actually laid eyes on the ocean.   The mighty Indus River, which flows from the Himalayas 
down through KPK and Punjab to Karachi and the Arabian Sea, and of which we are so proud, had 
turned into a raging torrent and burst its banks.   The other girls 
all covered their faces before emerging from the door and climbed into the back of the bus.   The fighting was taking place 
outside Mingora though we could still hear gunfire.   

Inside the helicopter I was vomiting blood.   I have no militants and no FM radio, he 
joked.   I was sure it was my turn next 

We pleaded with my father not to go to the hospital as it was very late and the people who had 
attacked Zahid Khan might be waiting for him.   The real tomb is on the floor below, where he lies alongside his sister Fatima, 
who died much later.   But eventually Baba gave him a fine speech, which my father 
practised and practised.   

In Swat we began to see more signs that the Taliban had never really left.   Thats why I have problems with our Pashtunwali code.   The 
first candidate is a beautiful girl, and he asks her very easy questions such as, How many wheels 
does a bicycle have? When she replies, Two, he says, You are so brilliant The next candidate is 
a man so Romeo asks him impossible things like, Without leaving your chair tell me the make of the 
fan in the room above us. .   We said it was the worst lunch ever.   


Growing up in a School 



My mother started school when she was six and stopped the same term She was unusual in the 
village as she had a father and brothers who encouraged her to go to school.   

This family rivalry meant that my father was bullied a lot by his cousins.   It was the first time I had ever visited.   (The 
average annual income is just $250 half the Pakistani average.   
Fortunately, many of his family live in the same area and they exchanged fire with the attackers, 
forcing them to flee.   I was thousands of miles away from home with a 
tube in my neck to help me breathe and unable to speak.   The Pakistani newspaper 
Dawn wrote in an editorial that the deal sent a disastrous signal fight the state militarily and it will 
give you what you want and get nothing in return .   He 
crossed the river in one of the metal boxes suspended from a pulley that we use as makeshift bridges.   He said, You 
are a child and it s your right to speak.   
Some girls were singing, I was drumming rhythms with my fingers on the seat.   My mother had had enough of the gunfire and tension and called Dr Afzal and begged him to 
persuade my father to leave.   We had only gone a short way when a policeman stopped the van and started asking 
questions, wasting precious time.   When someone takes away your pens you realise quite how 
important education is.   

In my dreams about the shooting my father is also in the bus and he is shot with me, and then there 
are men everywhere and I am searching for my father.   The leader of LeT is a fiery professor 
from Lahore called Hafiz Saeed, who is often on television calling on people to attack India.   She was 
just sixteen, one year older than me.   So when my father announced his 
desire to ask for the hand of my mother, Tor Pekai, it was clear neither side would welcome the 
marriage.   

When they got to the hospital the colonel told my father that if I was to be allowed to fly to the UK 
then there were other documents that needed to be signed.   First I thought it 
was a joke.   The mosque also set up its 
own courts to dispense Islamic justice, saying the state had failed.   Now wait, we are coming to 
Islamabad, he shouted.   Our 
people are used to being subservient because under the wali no criticism was tolerated.   They helped 
clear and rebuild destroyed villages as well as leading prayers and burying bodies.   It was almost unbelievable Islamabad is 
usually a quiet, orderly place, very different to the rest of our country.   It was such a 
small discount that most teachers did not bother, but he forced my father to apply for the rebate.   She saw me gossiping with a 
girl in the year above and told me, Now you are with Resham and I am with Rida.   

Atal had been told by my mother to ride on the bus with me, so he walked over from the primary 
school.   My mother made our usual breakfast of sugary tea, 
chapatis and fried egg.   
We had been left with no choice but to get involved in politics and campaign for education.   To get him 
released she walked forty miles alone over mountains to appeal to a powerful cousin.   The people who live in the FATA are all 
from Pashtun tribes like us Yousafzai, and live on both sides of the border with Afghanistan.   I sometimes had nightmares, but 
at least his radio broadcasts had stopped.   He was a mesmerising speaker.   My father was always talking on his 
mobile so I loved to copy him and pretend to make calls on mine.   Zahid Khan was a hotel owner and had a big 
hujra.   A few months later came the first attack on Pakistan by a US drone.   Look after your own affairs.   My father returned to the village every two or three weeks to see her.   

Colonel Junaid explained that a bone had fractured and splinters had gone into my brain, creating a 
shock and causing it to swell.   I cant leave my wife and sons alone here.   Anonymous.   



PART THREE 



Three Girls.   One of them was to a boy whose father, Sharafat Ali, had helped my father when he was a 
penniless college student.   Then they disappeared off to Islamabad if they were elected to the National 
Assembly, or Peshawar for the Provincial Assembly, and wed hear no more of them or their 
promises.   

Then there were more attacks.   We were afraid that the army wouldnt know 
who we were and would shoot us.   At that time 
suicide bombings were rare in Pakistan there were six in total that year and it was the biggest 
attack that had ever been carried out by Pakistani militants.   It was the first time the army had launched an operation against its own people outside 
the FATA.   Ziauddin, you have charisma; you can speak up and 
organise against them, he said.   With the Taliban in the valley, our 
government could say to the Americans we cant help you because we have our own problems.   She was always very careful about 
interactions with boys because her brothers watched everything.   My father would make him good tea and offer him biscuits in the hope that would 
keep him satisfied.   I was only eleven years old but I 
felt as though I had lost everything.   I agree that female teachers should educate girls, he said.   



My father could listen no more.   

The Americans said they had no choice but to do it like that because no one really knew which side 
the ISI was on and someone might have tipped off bin Laden before they reached him.   1 congratulate her.   

There was a teacher in our school who lived just a tenminute walk from our house.   The Taliban 
took over the Emerald Mountain with its mine and began selling the beautiful stones to buy their ugly 
weapons.   As far as he could see, I was medically dead.   It took them a week to clear the debris.   By the roadside were fresh springs 
and waterfalls, and when we stopped for a break and to drink some tea, the air was clean and fragrant 
with cedar and pine.   Sometimes a group of girls would go down to the river 
for a picnic with pots of rice and sherbet.   Our neighbours said the Taliban 
were instructing people to make it known to the mosque if their daughters were unmarried so they 
could be married off, probably to militants.   One of the people arrested was our old Urdu teacher who had 
refused to teach girls and had instead gone to help Fazlullahs men collect and destroy CDs and 
DVDs.   In their bubble inside the hospital they did not realise that my story had travelled all round the 
world and that people were calling for me to be sent abroad for treatment.   

Would it have been better if we had not become independent but stayed part of India? I asked my 
father.   
For many in the remote areas it was the first time they had seen a foreigner.   

The first thing I thought when I came round was, Thank God Im not dead.   She chatted with me for a while then with my father.   Even so my father insisted on starting the day in style by singing the national anthem.   Nearby there were boys fishing in the pile for 
metal using magnets on strings.   In Pakistan, madrasas are a kind of welfare system as they give free food and lodging, 
but their teaching does not follow a normal curriculum.   

Hai Kakar told me it could be dangerous to use my real name and gave me the pseudonym Gul 
Makai, which means cornflower and is the name of the heroine in a Pashtun folk story.   I made a speech about the importance 
of education and also talked about Benazir Bhutto as this was her city.   
She became a messenger for my parents, not only a doctor.  m or you will be next On 
some of the nights of the killings there would also be earthquakes, which made people even more 
scared as we connect every natural disaster with a human disaster.   In the morning 
the sun reflected off the top of Tor Ghar; when we got up for the fajr prayers, the first of our five 
daily prayers, we would look left and see the golden peak of Spin Ghar lit with the first rays of the 
sun like a white lady wearing a jumar tika a gold chain on her forehead.   

Colonel Junaid and the hospital director were not pleased to see them.   When the TV news began to show the devastation 
we saw that entire villages had been turned to dust.   The last few shops as we headed north out of Mingora 
were wooden shacks that seemed to lean on each other, in front of which were piles of reconditioned 
tyres for the bad roads ahead.   Even so, Swat was our home and we were not ready to leave it.  .   
My favourite programme was Shaka Laka Boom Boom, an Indian childrens series about a boy called 
Sanju who has a magic pencil.   He told her the news with a heavy heart.   It was the first Taliban attack on the police in our valley.   I used to go to her house to study, so whenever I was there I would 
pocket her things, mostly toy jewellery like earrings and necklaces.   We 
saw pictures on the news of what people were calling the Burqa Brigade young women and girls 
like us in burqas with sticks, attacking CD and DVD shops in bazaars in the centre of Islamabad.   It was as different for us as Islamabad is to New York.   Its 
all just rubble, he said.   The helicopter flight was one hour and fifteen minutes.   I slept with my mother and father in one 
room and the other was for guests.   
Our mountains, our trees, our flowers everything in our valley is about peace.   

When I was around four years old I asked my father, Aba, what colour are you? He replied, I 
dont know, a bit white, a bit black.   

At night I would pray, God, give me Sanjus pencil.   Like my father Ive always been a daydreamer, and sometimes in lessons 
my mind would drift and Id imagine that on the way home a terrorist might jump out and shoot me on 
those steps.   

In Swat it was safer in the town than in the remote areas and many of our family came from the 
countryside to stay with us.   There are men in the reception area of the school, and they see the girls enter, and this 
is very bad.   The year before I was born a group called the Taliban led by a oneeyed mullah had 
taken over the country and was burning girls schools.   We live in a place where schools are blown up.   I was speaking to them but no one could hear me because of 
the tube in my neck.   Millions of Afghans fled across the border and General Zia gave them refuge.   My father was almost bursting with pride at how I came across on the 
documentary.   Afghanistan is less 
than a hundred miles away, but to get there you have to go through Bajaur, one of the tribal areas 
between Pakistan and the border with Afghanistan.   First they turned on a tap to wash their hands and discovered there was no water.   Even today, when 
most of the foreign aid agencies have gone, shattered buildings still line the roadside and people are 
still waiting for compensation from the government to build new houses, the JuD banners and helpers 
are still present.   People will just imagine something 
terrible went on.   

He also felt he could never do enough to please my grandfather.   Now you just need to catch 
Fazlullah.   Almonds are very costly.   The teachers told us 
examiners first looked at how much we had written, then presentation.   Those from my class were me, Moniba, MalkaeNoor, 
Rida, Karishma and Sundus, and we were chaperoned by my mother and Madam Maryam 

We left for the capital on Independence Day, 14 August, and travelled by bus, everyone brimming 
with excitement.   Some people are afraid of ghosts, some of spiders or snakes in 
those days we were afraid of our fellow human beings.   Ms, ps and ks 
were all enemies lying in wait.   He had thought we were 
done with military dictatorships.   In 
our culture orphans are usually taken in by the extended family, but the earthquake was so bad that 
entire families had been wiped out or lost everything so were in no position to take in children.   While most of us 
cant live with our wives, he couldnt be without his.   in the afternoon two British doctors arrived by helicopter from Rawalpindi.   I agreed.   They liked it very much and told us they 
had a guesthouse in Abbottabad where we could all go.   Even today 
people talk of Mr Bhutto as a man of great charisma.   My cousin quickly gave us his music cassettes to hide in our purses.   Kainat had not realised she was hurt to start with and had gone home, 
then discovered she had been grazed by a bullet at the top of her right arm so her family had brought 
her in.   

It was hard to visit that place and read those speeches without thinking that Jinnah would be very 
disappointed in Pakistan.   

Though we had no generator at home, my father bought one to install at the school, and fresh water 
was pumped from a borehole, which all the children in the neighbourhood went to collect.   Our house 
was in Gulkada, which means place of flowers, but it used to be called Butkara, or place of the 



Buddhist statues.   

For most Pashtuns its a gloomy day when a daughter is born.   During Ramadan no food or 
drink can pass a Muslims lips in daylight hours.   Janser Khans hujra was a 
gathering place for people to talk politics, and my father was often there, so they had got to know each 
other.   Lets wait and see, he said.   My father joked that our home had become a boarding house.   Sometimes I thought I heard 
footsteps behind me or imagined figures slipping into the shadows.   The 
Taliban became the enemy of fine arts, culture and our history.   

At school my classmates were terrified.   A while later we heard that 
she had two children.   We should not kill her.   It didnt 
even have its own building.   Leave me, for Gods sake! I am a woman, a Muslim.   I wondered what I would do.   The women would not be attacked if they went to the markets, 
but the Taliban would shout at them and threaten them until they stayed at home.   He built a wooden ramp from which his catapults and 
arrows could reach the top of the mountain.   They assumed their passports and visas were being processed and 
they would join me in a few days.   And my 
ankles click when I walk, which makes adults squirm.   As it was, Jinnah died in September 1948 just over a year later.   Chop, chop, chop.   Spring was when Swat was at its greenest.   

I have a solution, said my father.   But she never banned me from doing anything.   

I am only human, and when I heard the guns my heart used to beat very fast.   Who are you? You are crazy! You 
need to go to a doctor.   It was also there that my father met his 



mentor Akbar Khan, who although he had not gone to college himself lent my father money so he 
could.   Why not your 
own hospital? General Kayani asked.   So many bodies 
had been left there that people started calling it the Bloody Square.   Her family had moved to 
Karachi to get away from the conflict and, as a woman, she could not live alone.   Dont tell Aba, I begged.   Finally it landed and I was taken on board with 
my father, my cousin Khanjee, Ahmad Shah and Maryam.   My father and 
I went to Peshawar and visited lots of places to tell people what was happening.   My father told him, Dont 
accept good things from bad people.   The journey was just two hours, 
which I found incredible.   They acted as couriers for bin Laden.   He ended by asking in a thundering voice my grandfather would have 
been proud of, Is Islam such a weak religion that it cannot tolerate a book written against it? Not my 
Islam! 



For the first few years after graduating from Jehanzeb my father worked as an English teacher in a 
wellknown private college.   

Some boys from my fathers district went off to fight in Afghanistan.   
All Pashtun children grow up with the story of how Malalai inspired the Afghan army to defeat the 
British in 1880 in one of the biggest battles of the Second Anglo Afghan War.   

I dreamed I wasnt really in hospital.   I knew that any of the girls in my class could 
have achieved what I had achieved if they had had their parents support.   I remembered the tapa my 
grandmother used to recite: No Pashtun leaves his land of his own sweet will.   We were wet and filthy by the time we got home.   The school has another gate.   We knew this would not be the end, but my father 
argued that if we had shariat the Taliban would have nothing more to fight for.   

My father was scared and my uncle kept saying, Be very careful some of these people might be 
secret agents.   

He began by telling us about the military operation in Swat, which he presented as a victory.   So people 
wouldnt think I was getting special treatment, my father arranged for us to do papers at another 
school, that of his friend Ahmad Shah.   Most of us had stayed with friends or family but some had 
been in the camps.   A peace deal had been struck between the Taliban and the 
provincial government, which was now under the control of the ANP, not the mullahs.   This involved the army bribing them to halt all attacks 
and keep out foreign fighters.   

One day we found our teacher Miss Hammeda in floods of tears.   He promised that the gas supply had been restored and that the banks were reopening, and 
called on the people of Swat to return.   

All too soon it was another year of exams.   Now their 
helicopters flew in pairs overhead like big black buzzing insects, and when we walked home we 
stayed close to the walls so they wouldnt see us.   They 
are very conservative and most of our madrasas are Deobandi.   I could 
see in his eyes that I had failed him I wanted him to be proud of me, like he was when I was 
presented with the first inyear trophies at school.   You think he will be happy with tea? He wants his money.   The 
women spent their days looking after the children and preparing food to serve to the men in their 
hujra upstairs.   I stood on our roof looking at the mountains, 
the snowtopped Mount Elum where Alexander the Great had reached up and touched Jupiter.   

My father sent food and aid to Shangla using money collected by friends and the Swat Association 
of Private Schools.   Fazlullahs men collected 
them into huge heaps on the streets and set them on fire, creating clouds of thick black smoke that 
reached high into the sky.   Shabana was not a Muslim, they said.   And schools were expected to treat officials regularly to a good lunch of chicken or trout from 
the river.   It was thought this would then keep rival clans from fighting.   I have a father who isn t scared, who stands by me.   

Their radio coverage spread across the valley and neighbouring districts.   As we headed south the 
land became more parched.   We saw 
the Red Mosque where the siege had taken place, the wide, wide Constitution Avenue leading to the 
whitecolonnaded buildings of the Parliament House and the Presidency, where Zardari now lived.   Overlooking 
the river were tourist restaurants with big glass windows we had never been to.   But it does not mean that.   A group of us girls 
gave an interview on ATV Khyber, the only privately owned Pashto television channel, about girls 
dropping out of school due to militancy.   

The bus did two trips every day, and that day we took the second one.   Meanwhile time was ticking away.   Our home is in Shangla.   I think 
somehow I knew he was there even though my eyes were closed.   

At night the village was very dark with just oil lamps twinkling in houses on the hills.   If they did not, he said, this would expose them for what 
they really were.   I didnt agree.   If I 
can help support one or two chil.   

In the school my father told the people, I saw your villagers burning these things.   Others said he had been ordered to deliver this speech and been warned, If you dont, 
there are four or five suicide bombers who will blast you and everyone there.   From what we could see, most of them werent convinced it was safe to return.   

We heard that thousands of people had been arrested including boys as young as eight who had 
been brainwashed to train for suicide bombing missions.   The Marghazar stream loops through it, milky brown from the plastic bags 
and rubbish thrown into it.   Pray for Malala, he told them.   He 
went outside, shouting Ziauddin, Ziauddin! The search almost cost Hidayatullah his life.   cant 
detect US helicopters but gets cable TV just fine, said another.   They thought I was modern because I came 
from town.   Some of the 
girls refused, saying their teachers had taught them that to become a martyr is a glorious thing.   My father didnt care.   But it used to wee everywhere so that night we put it outside.   The Taliban were using hotels and 
government buildings as bunkers.   I was astonished to see so many channels.   Because of the 
Taliban, the whole world is claiming we are terrorists.   My mother, father, grandmother, my cousins wife and baby and my 
brothers all squashed into the back of Dr Afzals van along with his wife and children.   

One day my father went to visit a friend in hospital and found lots of patients listening to cassettes 
of Fazlullahs sermons.   Our family and friends said they had thought it was the end of the world.   My mother put it best.   They had their own website and pirate FM station 
on which they broadcast, just like Fazlullah.   No Pakistani, including my father, thought this deal would 
work as Musharraf and Benazir hated each other.   We had suffered barbaric public courts and violent justice and had lived in a constant state of 
fear.   It was the worst flood in living memory.   The monthly school 
fees were never enough to cover all our outgoings so the extra fees were welcome, but my father was 
unhappy.   It seemed to us that these bureaucrats came to our 
province simply to get rich, then went back home.   That 
changing climate made Ghulamullah bold.   Am I 
the only person who can fetch it? he wondered.   The shop would then 
sell it on at a profit.   Like my father he was very outspoken and had been threatened 
too.   Malala is of Maiwand and shes the happiest person in the whole 
world.   I replied, If there is a snake and a lion 
coming to attack us what would we say is good, the snake or lion? 

Our school was a haven from the horrors outside.   People were bitterly disappointed and started abusing him What did that devil say? 
people asked.   We 
have continued with our education.   

In Pakistan we were still under a dictatorship, but America needed our help, just as it had in the 
1980s to fight the Russians in Afghanistan.   There cannot be two 



kings in one land.   I was not nervous though my father tried to 
intimidate me by saying Prime Minister Gilani came from a family of saints.   But the 
Russians ended up stuck in Afghanistan for ten years, through most of the 1980s, and when he became 
a teenager my father decided he too wanted to be a jihadi.   Usman Bhai Jan said no, there was 
no room; she would have to stay in the back with us.   
After, when they get power, they behave like the criminals they once hunted down 

Fazlullahs broadcasts were often aimed at women.   Initially Madam Maryams younger sister Ayesha agreed, but her father found out and refused 
his permission saying it was too risky.   Where once we used to blame our 
old enemy India for everything, now it was the US.   We would lie in bed 
listening to them boom boom all night.   

But some aid did get in.   

Its coming here, my father warned.   

He tried to explain that those children were breadwinners so if they went to school, even for free, 
the whole family would go hungry.   The Americans say they gave Pakistan billions of 
dollars to help their campaign against alQaeda but we didnt see a single cent.   One night there was a small explosion in their village 
and the wife cried.   

The next few hours were a waitandsee time, the nurses monitoring my heartbeat and vital signs.   My father was horrified, thinking this meant I had internal 
bleeding.   
The Taliban have never come for a small girl.   As he waited outside the headmasters office, he broke out into a 
sweat, and once inside his stutter was worse than ever.   

Maryam tried to find out more about what was going on.   They were friends from the village.   

Around that time my mother was probably just going through the doorway into our school for her 
first lesson since she had left school at age six.   She told my father she felt I 
would live but he could not see how.   
Other important people will soon become victims.   This is 
the path that he would later show me.   

In the village the day started early and even I, who liked to sleep late, woke with the sound of 
cocks crowing and the clatter of dishes as the women prepared breakfast for the men.   Some of them, his friends and sympathisers, were very upset, 
but he felt that others were jealous of our high profile and believed we had got what was coming to 
us.   

That afternoon, when my father came home from school, I told him about the scavenger children 
and begged him to go with me to look.   They told people that what was happening in Swat was not about Islam.   

When my mother arrived they hugged and held back tears.   The Taliban targeted not only politicians, MPs and the police, but also 
people who were not observing purdah, wearing the wrong length of beard or the wrong kind of 
shalwar kamiz.   My Malala, my Malala, my mother wailed and Maryam joined her.   Most had never received so much money at once.   He was made 
general secretary of the Pakhtoon Students Federation (PSF), which wanted equal rights for Pashtuns.   In Pakistan we dont have a culture of honouring people while they 
are alive, only the dead, so he thought it was a bad omen.   I cannot leave the area.   We 
didnt lead a life of luxury we Pashtuns prefer to sit on floors rather than chairs.   He loved that painting and had hung it over his bed.   He was an impatient man at the best of times and would fly into a rage 
over the smallest thing like a hen going astray or a cup getting broken.   

That morning had begun like any other, though a little later than usual.   

My mother is very pious and prays five times a day, though not in the mosque as that is only for the 
men.   All those deadlines theyd given at the beginning when they said the next 
twentyfour hours were dangerous, fortyeight were crucial, seventytwo were critical had all 



passed without incident.   One day one of our Urdu teachers, Nawab Ali, told my father, I wont be coming to 



school tomorrow.   What you are doing is against our people and 
against Pakistan, he would say.   All that 
remained of the chickens was a pile of feathers and the bones of their small bodies entangled as if 
they had died in an embrace.   

At the start of May our army launched Operation True Path to drive the Taliban out of Swat.   Dont 
help me, brother, as this will bring immense pleasure to Fazlullah.   Before Abbottabad hed 
been in Haripur and before that hidden away in our own Swat Valley, where he met Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammad, the mastermind of 9/ 1 1 .   

What is she saying? asked my aunt as if I were talking about something impossible.   A woman can only remarry if her 
husband is declared dead, not missing.   If one man, Fazlullah, can destroy everything, why 
can t one girl change it? I wondered.   He became determined to end the traditional rivalry between him and his cousins.   She 
thought of sleeping with a knife under her pillow.   

As the khushal School started to attract more pupils, we moved again and finally had a television.   

And it was hard to believe it was all over! More than a thousand ordinary people and police had 
been killed.   On the way a boy on a bicycle crashed into me 
and my left shoulder hurt so much that my eyes watered.   Instead I am in a country which is five hours 
behind my beloved homeland Pakistan and my home in the Swat Valley.   He was twentyeight years old.   
Everyone thinks they can open a school just like that! 

The other people in the office laughed along, ridiculing him My father was angry.   



17 

Praying to Be Tall 



When i was thirteen I stopped growing.   
Then Safmas father put his foot on the pedal and away we drove out of the small world of our street, 
home and school and into the unknown.   He arrested our elected prime minister, Zulfikar 
Ali Bhutto, and had him tried for treason then hanged from a scaffold in Rawalpindi jail.   It was unbelievable.   If the Taliban find out youre giving water in the month 
of Ramadan they will bomb us ! 

My father replied that people would die either of thirst or bombings.   Wed also heard that many homes had been looted.   I have had such dreams since the launch 
of the military operation in Swat.   This means soulmate in Persian, and he always called me that at 
the start of the day.   On the way we passed 
through Aashiqan eRasool square and were shocked to see a picture of the murderer of Governor 
Salman Taseer decorated with garlands of rose petals as though he were a saint.   

Our excitement did not last long.   

When he heard the news my father said the earth fell away from his feet.   

We were lucky our house had not been broken into.   If you want to 
resolve a dispute or come out from conflict, the very first thing is to speak the truth.   We Pashtuns see this as an auspicious sign.   We did not 
know then that Musharraf was also letting the Americans use our airfields.   It was strange to think it was just a port of 300,000 
people when Pakistan was created.   When we found peaches for sale we were so 
happy.   Around this time my mother also got tired of 
Fazlullah, especially when he began to preach against education and insist that those who went to 
school would also go to hell.   Dr Shamsher had been an outspoken critic of the Taliban.   Shame 
is a very terrible thing for a Pashtun man.   General Zia was invited to meet 
President Ronald Reagan at the White House and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher at 10 Downing 
Street.   Islam teaches us to treat women politely, he said.   Afterwards he said that had he known Jinnah was dying he would have delayed and 
there would have been no Pakistan.   He also liked to talk about politics.   You think I enter the school and take my clothes off? When you see a boy and a 
girl you see a scandal.   When her father called, my father cried.   You already have lots of problems and we are doing lots for you, he replied.   In fact, as my mother often reminds 
my father, he was not present for the actual ceremony.   I looked at the honours board and wondered if my name would ever 
appear on it again.   I kept losing my place as the pages danced in my 
shaking hands, but as I ended with Lincolns words, I looked up at my father.   Her brother 
had been picked up by the army, put in leg irons and tortured, and then kept in a fridge until he died.   Hidayatullah was one of the first to call.   



My father consulted my mother on everything.   One said he had been ordered by Mullah Fazlullah 
to help build his centre in Imam Deri.   The roof overlooked the stage so some 
media had set up their cameras there.   I knew we were better off than those who lived in the camps, 
queuing for food and water for hours under the hot sun, but I missed my valley.   But we werent exactly cooperating as the ISI was still 
arming Taliban fighters and giving their leaders sanctuary in Quetta.   

We heard about Shabanas death the next morning.   The 
Afghans were so proud that the last Afghan king built a Maiwand victory monument in the centre of 
Kabul.   
Suddenly the school owners were in a position of power.   
The most important jobs in the army, bureaucracy and government are all taken by Punjabis because 
they come from the biggest and most powerful province.   Now she lives in New York.   He wanted tea all the time, our traditional tea with milk and sugar and cardamom, 
but even my mother tired of this and eventually made some so bitter that he lost the taste for it.   People across Pakistan were glued to a 
series on primetime TV called Beyond the Call of Duty, which was supposed to consist of reallife 
stories of soldiers battling militants in Swat.   Our home 
was near Circuit House, the army headquarters, so we were worried it might have been destroyed in 
the shelling.   He had the chance 
to be the hero of history but didnt take it, she said.   We must all work together for 
the rights of girls, I said.   

We were terribly worried about our family in Shangla, jammed between those narrow mountains.   But 
we soon found out that the Americans had gone it alone.   This was perhaps because the military 
had been so attached to the mosque.   But then he started up again.   But I tried to be obedient and 
polite, always saying, Yes, sir.   I teased him that one of the reasons he called me Jani was because he 
found it easier to say than Malala.   I went and whispered Quranic verses over the books to try and protect 
them.   If you do not fall in the battle of Maiwand then, by God, someone is 
saving you as a symbol of shame.   Whatever you thought about Nek Mohammad, we were not at war 
with the Americans and were shocked that they would launch attacks from the sky on our soil.   

On the way to school I sometimes saw the Taliban with their caps and long dirty hair.   

The ceremony was on 20 December 2011 at the prime ministers official residence, one of the big 
white mansions on the hill at the end of Constitution Avenue which I had seen on my trip to 
Islamabad.   I thought Swat would be free of the Taliban one day and we would rejoice, but 
now I realised that might not happen.   Mullahs from the TNSM preached that the earthquake was a warning from God.   Nor would 



he leave Swat.   My mind transports 
me back to my school and there I am reunited with my friends and teachers.   

When my parents finally got back to the hostel it was with a very heavy heart.   

That is wrong! said the maulana.   

The threats began to come closer to home.   One version was that they tried to persuade Asia Bibi to convert to Islam.   My father didnt understand what this meant.   Some even agreed with her killing, out of fear of the Taliban or because they were in favour 
of them.   He recognised the number as the Khushal 
School and passed the phone to his friend Ahmad Shah to answer.   We found that the building opposite 
the girls school had been hit by a missile but the school itself looked intact.   She was pro 
West; she was speaking against the Taliban; she was calling President Obama her idol.   I know 
who targeted me.   

The other girls were screaming and crying.   The Sangota girls were also very bright, which meant more 
competition.   
General Kayani was determined to change this, and the army had once again stepped in where the 
civilians had failed.   We liked performing plays.   After the wedding my mother moved in with my grandfather and my 
uncle.   He was the guarantor that 
the Taliban would lay down their arms and there would be peace in the valley.   He was a scary man with dark panda shadows around his eyes, large teeth that seemed to 
stand to attention and hair pomaded flat on his head.   

The next morning a school worker came with milk, bread and eggs to our house for our breakfast.   Her mother, my grandmother, had looked after all eight children 
alone after my grandfather had an accident and broke his pelvis and could not leave his bed for eight 
years.   This maulana is starting a campaign against 
you, he warned.   His own 
education in Delhi had been free he had lived like a talib in the mosques, and local people had 
provided the students with food and clothes.   But now I had two other girls in the 
room I want space! Id cry.   The army had wanted to imprison him, but the intelligence service had prevailed and taken him 
to Bajaur so that he could slip across the border to Afghanistan.   I kept thinking of my school bag at home 
with copies of Oliver Twist and Romeo and Juliet waiting to be read and the Ugly Betty DVDs on the 
shelf.   My mother was away and Hidayatullah needed my father to help him move 
everything up to the first floor, safe from the fastrising waters, but he couldnt find him anywhere.   I noticed wherever he went he would 
look up and down the street four or five times.   

When we landed in Peshawar, they assumed wed be taken to Lady Reading Hospital, where there 
was a very good neurosurgeon called Dr Mumtaz who had been recommended.   Hello, 
BhabiV I called.   Then Id pray to God, Bless us.   In the winter 
when parents didnt want their children to stay outside in the snow they would tell the story about the 
lion or tiger which must always make the first step in the snow.   One of the school clerks told my father that the mufti kept 
coming into school and demanding why we girls were still using the main entrance.   We 
had seen pictures of how the army had flattened everything in an operation against militants in Bajaur 
and we thought everything we knew would be destroyed.   Our founder Jinnah wanted the rights of 
Muslims in India to be recognised, but the majority of people in India were Hindu.   Pashtuns cannot stand anyone belittling them, nor was he about to pay a 
bribe for something he was entitled to.   Even for the adults it was 
hard to imagine the biggest buildings in Swat are the hospital and a hotel, which are two or three 
storeys.   They were so touched by his kindness 
that they shared our story with him.   Afterwards Musa Khans body was found nearby.   We were very unhappy about the armys failure to 
capture the Taliban leadership, and my father and I continued to give lots of interviews.   
The British government had offered assistance but needed a formal request from the Pakistan 
government.   It was shortly before the earthquake that Fazlullah had appeared in Imam 
Deri, a small village just a few miles outside Mingora on the other side of the Swat River, and set up 
his illegal radio station.   Bin Laden lived on the top floor with his youngest wife, a Yemeni woman 
named Amal.   I used to sit in wonder, listening 
to everything they were being taught.   What kind of mullah is he? Hes driving us crazy.   Pa tool 
jehan ke da khushala da, he sang.   Look at her, he told Adam Ellick.   Suddenly there was the crack of gunfire and an 
explosion as a suicide bomber blew himself up by the side of her vehicle.   We saw an official from the United Nations say on television that it was the worst logistical 
nightmare that the UN had ever faced.   

They named it the Khushal School after one of my fathers great heroes, Khushal Khan Khattak, the 
warrior poet from Akora just south of Swat, who tried to unify all Pashtun tribes against the Moghuls 
in the seventeenth century Near the entrance they painted a motto: we are committed to build for 
you the call of the new era.   I was worried about losing even more marks so I made myself coffee with milk to drive 
away the devils of sleep.   

I grunted.   She 
insisted we leave, but my father was exhausted and we Muslims believe our fate is written by God.   Just the day before the barber had told a journalist that the Taliban were good Muslims.   Before we left, Moniba and I had an argument over something so silly I cant remember what it 
was.   Yet these 
innocent men were being held while the Taliban leaders went free.   The 
militants fled to the forests and by early December the army said they had cleared most areas.   The boys learn the Quran by heart, rocking 
back and forth as they recite.   They had ended up 
in an argument, and of course just as in our arguments at school there were different versions of who 
said what.   Then they left in 
their helicopter because it is dangerous to be in Peshawar after dark.   It was a journey of just five minutes 
along the stinky stream, past the giant billboard for Dr Humayuns Hair Transplant Institute where we 
joked that one of our bald male teachers must have gone when he suddenly started to sprout hair.   His brother 
Maulana Liaquat, along with three of Liaquats sons, were among those killed in an American drone 
attack on the madrasa in Bajaur at the end of October 2006.   He himself had been a political prisoner as well as a close ally of Benazir.   More than three years had passed since the 
military operation to drive the Taliban out of Swat had begun.   

A few days later the video was everywhere.   He also helped Baba with 
heavy tasks like clearing snow from the roof.   

They were still patrolling the Cheena Bazaar.   Now we will have the courage to speak.   But Sher Zaman did not go to college and ended up becoming a 
dispenser in the village pharmacy.   
They destroyed an entire brigade, one of the worst defeats in the history of the British army.   I was overwhelmed.   Unlike Moniba, 
who has straight hair, mine is wavy, and I liked to twist it into curls or tie it into plaits.   So Madam Maryam and I wrote an email to General Abbas explaining the situation.   A few 
weeks before, we had met the American video journalist Adam Ellick in Peshawar.   

Listen, Maulana, he told Fazlullah.   Her voice was soft and 
her words were soothing, and I drifted back to sleep.   He immediately thought, Malala could be on that bus! 
Then he tried to reassure himself, thinking it might be a boy, a jealous lover who had fired a pistol in 
the air to shame his beloved.   Many of my friends had left the valley so they could be educated in Peshawar, but my father 
insisted we would not leave.   He wanted a land of 
tolerance.   

I slept in the long room at the front of our house, and the only furniture was a bed and a cabinet 
which I had bought with some of the money I had been given as an award for campaigning for peace 
in our valley and the right for girls to go to school.   It was also becoming clear that while they were 
best friends, they found it hard to work as business partners.   The phone did not stop ringing.   

We lived in the shadow of the Hindu Kush mountains, where the men went to shoot ibex and golden 
cockerels.   Here was a man who had read so many 
books, who wrote her poems she could not read, and whose ambition was to have his own school.   Our men think earning money and ordering around others is where power lies.   

People liked to hear him talk, and I loved the evenings when guests visited.   Hardly any 
women from these areas can read.   



O Ziauddin! What have they done? Madam Maryam burst through the doors.   My father said he had heard rumours that some Taliban were even hiding inside the camps 



and harassing the women.   It was fun 
learning how to report issues properly.   
Around three and a half million people had lost their homes.   When the sun hit a certain rock, we 
used to say our asr or afternoon prayers.   My mother and father sat outside the operating theatre.   My parents had 
not held one for me because they could not afford the goat and rice needed to feed the guests, and my 
grandfather would not help them out because I was not a boy.   The bus dropped me at 
the steps leading up to our street.   The 
Americans cut off aid.   My father often spoke of the kindness of Akbar Khan and Nasir Pacha to illustrate 
that if you help someone in need you might also receive unexpected aid.   They were also tired of the 
endless bloodshed.   .   



After that my father was restless and could not enjoy Karachi.   


I woke up on 16 October, a week after the shooting.   I promised 
myself Id never do such a thing again.   

I had gone to bed when just before midnight the militants struck.   I had a 
window seat and could see the deserts and mountains of our land below me.   On the walls were photographs of all our army 
chiefs, the most powerful men in our country including dictators like Musharraf and scary Zia.   

It took over half an hour to walk to school, and because I am bad at getting up in the morning the 



second day we were late.   He did not 
believe in badal revenge and would try to make people see that neither side had anything to gain 
from continuing the violence, and it would be better for them to get on with their lives.   Dr Javid suggested 
Great Ormond Street in London, and specialist hospitals in Edinburgh and Glasgow.   

My father was in awe of my grandfather and told me wonderful stories about him, but he also told 
me that he was a man who could not meet the high standards he set for others.   They believed 
any statue or painting was haram, sinful and therefore prohibited.   Malala, Malala.   The 
operation took almost five hours.   It was a long slow journey and we were all very sweaty 
crammed in together.   Safina said nothing about my phone, which didnt seem fair, but I didnt 
mention it either.   They lavished praise on him 

Prime Minister Zulfikar Bhutto had appointed Zia as his army chief because he thought he was not 
very intelligent and would not be a threat.   

Many families live in walled compounds with watchtowers so they can keep an eye out for their 
enemies.   If you eat them with milk just before bed it makes you brainy But I 
knew he didnt have much money and the almonds in the dish were a reminder of my guilt.   

The diary of Gul Makai received attention further afield.   I had read about 
Obama and admired him because as a young black man from a struggling family he had achieved his 
ambitions and dreams.   

On 27 December Benazir Bhutto addressed an election rally in Liaquat Bagh, the park in 
Rawalpindi where our first prime minister, Liaquat Ali, was assassinated.   A 
teenage girl wearing a black burqa and red trousers was lying face down on the ground being flogged 
in broad daylight by a bearded man in a black turban.   The army chief was 
spending a surprising amount of his time on the issue Dr Javid says they spent six hours discussing 
me! Perhaps more than any politician he understood the political implications if I did not survive.   Our guests need the bathroom and everyone is having 
to wait for you 

One of the worst times was the fasting month of Ramadan in 2008.   

With so few students, they had little money to equip the school and soon ran out of credit.   The first meeting was in a hall with lots of 
politicians and activists.   Even those who had 
defended Fazlullah at the start, believing his men were the real standardbearers of Islam, and given 
him their gold, began to turn against him My father told me about a woman who had donated 
generously to the Taliban while her husband was working abroad.   Why did you wake me? Im not 
leaving my family.   I remembered the story of my father surprising 
my grandfather and longed to do the same.   

People warned my father to leave the hospital.   

The army still had their guns trained on the mountains overlooking Mingora.   How did they get there? If you have so much information, why cant 
you catch them? 

His reply went on for about ten to fifteen minutes and I couldnt work out what his answer was! 
Then I asked about reconstruction.   Down on the river at the Karshat end were 
water buffaloes.   Then vice versa.   
You run the haram school, he said.   I have a school, but I am neither a khan nor a political leader.   

One day we got a call from America, from a student at Stanford University.   The president of the students group in Jehanzeb College was Ihsan ulHaq 
Haqqani.   They had to pay 
them rent in kind, usually a share of their crop.   Moniba sets down rules which I try to follow.   My father would say to her, Pekai, purdah is not only in the veil, purdah is in the heart.   We want to be free to go to school or to go to work.   

At least there was no sign of the Taliban.   It was as if under Zia jihad had become the 
sixth pillar of our religion on top of the five we grow up to learn the belief in one God, namaz or 
prayers five times a day, giving zakat or alms, roza fasting from dawn till sunset during the month 
of Ramadan and haj, the pilgrimage to Mecca, which every ablebodied Muslim should do once in 
their lifetime.   Sultana was very shorttempered and my mother did not like having 



her in the house, but my father arranged a small allowance for her and a place for Shehnaz and her 
other brother at his school.   The attack seemed to send the message that the CIA could do as it pleased in our 
country.   We dont 
know what the doctor injected her with but she went into shock and died.   I didnt want to stop learning.   
My mother and brothers had no passports or documentation.   
What you did was wrong, Malala, she said.   My father was astonished and pleased 
 in our country few doctors bother explaining anything to an illiterate woman.   Underneath were the rotting heads of goats.   We still had little 
money and my mother checked her purse to see what she had.   With my birthday came the news 
that the Taliban had killed the owner of the Swat Continental Hotel, who was on a peace committee.   This school is a centre of vulgarity and obscenity and they take girls for picnics to different 
resorts.   I did not know how to stop.   

But I said, Education is education.   At first we thought we were safe 
in Mingora, the biggest town in Swat.   



When he met his fellow activists, particularly his old friends Ahmad Shah, Mohammad Farooq and 
Zahid Khan, I often went with him Ahmad Shah also had a school, where Mohammad Farooq 
worked, and they would sometimes gather on his lawn.   We had been 
getting threats all year.   A famous poem was written at that time by Rahmat Shah Sayel, the same Peshawar poet who 
wrote the poem about my namesake.   They had no phone and no access to a 
computer to check on my progress.   I had told everyone in my class that the Taliban wouldnt go 
through with it.   In Pashto we 
love to sing tapey, twoline poems, and as she scattered the rice she would sing one: Dont kill 
doves in the garden.   My fathers hand 
shook as he signed the consent papers.   
Sometimes Fazlullah appeared galloping in on a black horse.   He was also an imam at the local mosque.   When my mother arrived, 
Hidayatullah had to move into the office and sleep on a hard wooden chair.   He 
ordered Karachi airport to switch off its landing lights and to park fire engines on the runway to block 
the plane even though it had 200 other passengers on board and not enough fuel to get to another 
country.   My father had 
turned his weakness into strength.   

My father seemed worried and shooed us into the other room, but the house was small so we could 
hear every word.   

As my father had found with Naeem, it is not easy to mix business and friendship.   Then in the evening, when the white peak of Spin Ghar was 
even more beautiful than in the morning, we said the makkam or evening prayers.   He started to sleep at one of his friends 
houses to protect us in case the Taliban came for him.   All the men there carry weapons and hundreds of 
soldiers were killed when the locals revolted.   She told my father, You dont 
have to come, but I am going and I will take the children to Shangla.   There is a suicide bomber over there! Wed promised to meet the peace 
walker, so we went by a different route, placed a garland round his neck, then left quickly for home.   

Whenever he saw me he would greet me with a song as he was still concerned about the sad 
meaning of my name and wanted to lend some happiness to it: L Malala Maiwand wala da.   His voice did not boom like his fathers, but his 
passion shone through and as he went on he gained confidence.   People were desperately worried that the Taliban would 
take advantage of the chaos and return to the valley.   The Quran teaches us sabar patience but often it feels that we have 
forgotten the word and think Islam means women sitting at home in purdah or wearing burqas while 
men do jihad.   When my father first brought his 
wife to school, all the teachers referred to her as my brothers wife or Bhabi.   So can he.   I 
took a photo of her and vowed I would do everything in my power to help educate girls just like her.   I kept seeing the dirty face of the girl from the dump and 
continued to pester my father to give them places at our school.   He did not mention he could not afford to take it as he did not want to 
embarrass his father.   You are as vulnerable and as wanted a target as he is.   She smells the threat, my mother told 
my father.   

No, I have to do this, said Nawab Ali.   Roads, bridges, water and power had all 
gone.   But there was so much water that 
the bridge across the dirty stream was submerged so we had to find another way.   

We like conspiracy theories in Pakistan and we had many.   She begged him to give some cooked rice to the poor, as we believe that if you give 
rice, even ants and birds will eat the bits that drop to the floor and will pray for us.   Her eyes would not meet mine.   
Write your name as Ziauddin Shaheen, he told him.   

In some ways the army did not seem very different to the militants.   All we could see was a little stamp of open sky out of the back and 
glimpses of the sun, at that time of day a yellow orb floating in the dust that streamed over everything.   

In Pakistan when women say they want independence, people think this means we dont want to 
obey our fathers, brothers or husbands.   I entrust her to you 



As soon as Usman Bhai Jan realised what had happened he drove the dyna to Swat Central Hospital 
at top speed.   

Many of the militants in the mosque had fought in Afghanistan or Kashmir.   

It was late in the evening of 3 August when my father received an alarming phone call from a Geo 
TV correspondent called Mehboob.   We couldnt 
believe the army had been oblivious to bin Laden s whereabouts.   

Someone gave me a copy of The Alchemist by Paulo Coelho, a fable about a shepherd boy who 
travels to the Pyramids in search of treasure when all the time its at home.   He wanted to show the human side of the catastrophe in 
Swat.   We are supposed to be collecting money in enrolment 
fees.   I wasnt the only one to be interviewed.   It made me think 
of old war movies or the video games my brother Khushal loves to play.   

My father said the radio station was the talk of the staffroom.   He was an 
extremely disciplined man and could not understand why they were not the same.   Unfortunately the demand for English tuition turned out to be low, and there 
were unexpected drains on their income.   The gunfire was in celebration.   

As the Yousafzai in Swat had no ruler, there were constant feuds between the khans and even 
within their own families.   Local people had no idea what it was back then we did not know that the 
Americans could do such a thing.   But the image of America in Pakistan had become of one of drones, secret 
raids on our territory and Raymond Davis.   But when they went 
there to look for a building, there were banners everywhere advertising a school opening someone 
had beaten them to it.   Its a kind of 
Romeo and Juliet story in which Gul Makai and Musa Khan meet at school and fall in love.   Not only did our army and ISI have long links with 
some of the militants, but it also meant our troops would be fighting their own Pashtun brothers.   If anything he became more outspoken, 
particularly against the intelligence agencies, as he was convinced they were behind the Taliban.   Children in the refugee camps were even given school textbooks produced by 
an American university which taught basic arithmetic through fighting.   The most visible of all was JamaatulDawa (JuD), the welfare wing of Lashkare 
Taiba.   We dont understand why hes been 
attacked when they claim theres peace, he said.   Sometimes they would get stuck and he would 
repeat the same syllable over and over like a record caught in a groove as we all waited for the next 
syllable to suddenly pop out.   No one knew where he got the cement and iron 
bars from but the workforce was local.   Finally my father was 
called forward.   Other people said Davis was really spying on our nuclear weapons.   

I admired his mind, she says.   Wed be expected to cook and serve our 
brothers and fathers.   Soon they had 
taken over many villages.   He 
called back with bad news they had been left everywhere, though most shopkeepers had ignored 
them and thrown them away.   Musharraf then 
seized power and threw Sharif into a dungeon in Attack Fort.   

There were a lot of us not just us five but also my grandmother, my cousin, his wife, Honey, and 
their baby.   Today Swat is part of the province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, or 
KPK, as many Pakistanis call it, but Swat used to be separate from the rest of Pakistan.   He was relieved but baffled.   He would probably say that this was not the country he had wanted.   Are you Malalas father? Once again my fathers heart sank.   If any of his children accidentally spilt their food he would fly into a rage.   

Driving from the airport to the hostel, I was amazed by the number of people and houses and cars.   

I liked doing my hair in different styles and would spend ages in the bathroom in front of the mirror 
trying out looks I had seen in movies.   AntiTaliban slogans were scrawled all over the walls.   My father did not get 
home till late that evening as he had been busy checking all the other school buildings.   There wasnt time to fetch my mother so 
Maryam insisted she would go too as I might need a womans help.   

Still, it was with a heavy heart that we returned to Swat.   Policemen 
were so scared of being killed that they took out adverts in the newspapers to announce they had left 



the force.   There was a lot of construction going on to build a 
new tower block.   Even if I have to 
live in the deserts of the Sahara, I need her eyes open; I wont be able to live without her.   Its just I so wanted a new book, 
unmarked by another student and bought with my father s money.   



We remembered how scared we had been that morning and started raising money at school.   Thats what he 
does.   

It was in one of Yaseem s newspapers that my father read for the first time some of the incredible 
international reaction to my shooting.   In it I wrote, I was getting ready for school 
one day and was about to put on my uniform when I remembered the advice of our principal, so that 
day I decided to wear my favourite pink dress.   He was at an important gathering of about 400 principals who had come 
from all over Swat to protest against plans by the government to impose a central regulatory authority.   At the back of the house was a 
veranda where the women gathered.   But a smaller 
group believed that leadership should have stayed within the Prophets family and that Ali, his sonin 
law and cousin, should have taken over.   

Our school bell rang again for the first time on 1 August.   I have trouble in my home too.   The tourist areas were the hardest hit parts of Swat.   

We started to receive text messages asking us to rally in the streets and show our support of the 
army.   Besides, soon the winter would be here, bringing the snow, which would cleanse and 
quieten everything.   The rich people 
of Pakistan came on holiday to enjoy our clean air and scenery and our Sufi festivals of music and 
dancing.   We 
had to climb onto a huge boulder in a field, and even then we rarely had more than one bar of 
reception so we hardly ever spoke to him But after we had been in Shangla for about six weeks, my 
father said we could travel to Peshawar, where he had been staying in one room with three friends.   I couldnt space letters.   

The Bloody Square 

The bodies would be dumped in the square at night so that everyone would see them the next 
morning on their way to work.   Quickly, it became a rubbish mountain.   It does not matter what language you choose, the important 
thing is the words you use to express yourself.   She was bad, and it was right that she was killed.   

We Pashtuns know the stone of revenge never decays, and when you do something wrong you will 
face the music.   The soldiers had made a hole in the wall through 
which you could see the city below.   He was recognised by the British as the head of state in 1926 and 
installed as wali, which is our word for ruler.   Luckily, Benazir survived because 
she had gone downstairs to an armoured compartment to rest her feet just before the explosions, but 
150 people had been killed.   They called themselves Martyrs for 
Benazir.   

The helipad was just a mile from our house and all the women rushed up to the roof.   Everyone wanted to see the back of the corrupt government officials sent into the valley.   Our friends couldnt believe it.   The army and Taliban had fought street to street and almost every wall was 
pockmarked with bullet holes.   I didnt mind; I just 
wanted to be friends.   

* 

A few months after that, in October 20 1 1 my father told me he had received an email informing him I 
was one of five nominees for the international peace prize of KidsRights, a childrens advocacy 
group based in Amsterdam.   The words came out wrong.   They had collected money and organised a 
party for me with a big white cake on which was written success forever in chocolate icing.   My father broke the seal on the wooden storage box of maize and filled their 
bowls.   The price of the 
gas cylinders we used to buy from the market doubled so my mother had to cook on a fire like we did 
in the village.   Around 600 chiefs were massacred.   Why are you afraid? he asked.   
Our classes were still mixed at that age, and all the boys and girls yelled, Earthquake! We ran 
outside as we had been taught to do.   As a guest, he was treated 
exceptionally well.   Many people were scared.   I 
wanted to write my fathers phone number.   But tragically she had died that January of a heart attack following an epileptic fit.   The 
military finally lost patience and stormed the compound.   Exams were due in March but how could they take place? Coming first didnt 
matter if you couldnt study at all.   

Maulana, you have driven me to the wall! my father said.   People jokingly referred to the MMA as the Mullah Military 
Alliance and said they got elected because they had Musharraf s support.   Much of the road had collapsed into the river and large boulders had fallen and 
blocked the way.   
Their home was in Spal Bandi, a beautiful mountain village on the way to the White Palace, and my 
father describes it as a romantic and inspirational place.   She 
was relieved to see us and hugged us, tears streaming down her face.   And one of my friends, Sundus, had lost her father, who had 
been killed in an explosion.   My father also designed a shield with a famous quote from Khattak in 
Pashto: I girt my sword in the name of Afghan honour.   We hid our school bags and our books in our shawls.   There had been an outcry, and the Taliban spokesman Muslim Khan had 
called on the doctor to reopen it.   Most 
Pashtun men never do this, as sharing problems with women is seen as weak.   What are you doing? I asked 
him.   Even the woodpeckers.   Moving me a foreign minor to the Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital was not a simple exercise, and Bolger soon found himself tangled in the hoops of British and 
Pakistani bureaucracy.   We can sit by and hope the government will help but they wont.   

They called it Operation Silence although it was very loud.   But now he was irritated.   In our case it 
happened to be a whitebearded militant called Sufi Mohammad.   
Then MMA activists launched attacks on cinemas and tore down billboards with pictures of women 
or blacked them out with paint.   His advice was 
to appeal to God and that He would answer our prayers.   My father heard that many of the boys were taken in by the JuD and housed in 
their madrasas.   
There were suicide bombings all over the country: even the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad had been 
blown up.   Sangota 



school has been there since the 1960s and never converted anyone to Christianity in fact some of 
them converted to Islam.   I was restless and kept trying to get the monitor off my finger.   O God, let 
me give the rest of my life to her; I have lived enough.   Like most people in Swat we 
are from the Yousafzai tribe.   

I had amassed a lot of money by the end of that year half a million rupees each from the prime 
minister, the chief minister of Punjab, the chief minister of our state Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the 
Sindh government.   I dreamed of going to the top of Mount Elum like Alexander the Great to touch Jupiter and even 
beyond the valley.   Many students argued that the book 
should be banned and burned and the fatwa upheld.   Id heard you were an infidel, he said to my father, but there 
are Qurans in your room 

Of course there are! replied my father, astonished that his faith would be questioned.   If you are unable to do that then you should tell others 
about it, and if you cant do that you should think about how bad it is in your heart.   When they came to our house I would bring them tea then sit quietly listening as they discussed 
what to do.   Colonel Junaid 
ordered a third CT scan.   We know him affectionately as Badshah Sahib, and though he was 
completely illiterate, he managed to bring peace to the valley.   Then he 
asked if he could talk to me and began asking questions using Irfan as an interpreter.   We passed nine resolutions 
calling for an end to child labour and asking for help to send the disabled and street children to 
school, as well as for the reconstruction of all the schools destroyed by the Taliban.   There in black and white were the words the patient may die.   Then 9/11 had made this militancy more mainstream.   
Once there, all they do is keep the children quiet with a long stick as they cannot imagine education 
will be any use to them.   The girls will enter through that.   But finally I had persuaded her to let me grow it to my shoulders.   

Finally everyone was ready.   
Everyone thought he was mad.   

One night we all went for dinner at the house of my fathers friend Dr Afzal, who runs a hospital.   People would 
say they were two sides of the same coin.   We should focus on practical 
issues.   Thankfully, our supreme court stopped this.   Roads, crops and entire villages were washed away.   Ziauddin is as clean as an egg with no hair, she said.   I have informed my family and they are very unhappy.   He laughed at the idea.   It is huge and white and looks like a shimmering tent suspended between 
minarets.   How was it possible that we were now garlanding murderers? 

Shortly after that my father got another death threat.   .   First my father would try to rouse me.   My father says that in our part of the world this idea of jihad was very much 
encouraged by the CIA.   He used his wifes phone to protect us as he said his own phone 
was bugged by the intelligence services.   

But I thought the bullet hadnt entered her brain, said my father.   Now we are a country of 180 million and more than 96 per cent 
are Muslim We also have around two million Christians and more than two million Ahmadis, who 
say they are Muslims though our government says they are not.   My father was 
teacher, accountant and principal.