 

Swat lies on a geological fault line and we often had earthquakes, but this felt different.  She 
begged my grandmother to start praying immediately.  The mosque also set up its 
own courts to dispense Islamic justice, saying the state had failed.  

My father said it was a shameful day.  I think there was some problem with hygiene in that muddy place, says my father.  She will cook and wash for us.  As we waited for the signal to start the exam, I recited holy verses to 
myself.  It was hard for the authorities to reach places like Shangla because 
most of the roads and bridges had gone and local government had been wiped out throughout the 
region.  

I gave the note to my father and he was angry.  

We also learned that American politicians were furious that bin Laden had been living under our 
noses when all along they had imagined he was hiding in a cave.  

I liked doing my hair in different styles and would spend ages in the bathroom in front of the mirror 
trying out looks I had seen in movies.  He had studied in the 
madrasa of Maulana Sufi Mohammad, the founder of the TNSM, and married his daughter.  

As my father was still teaching, Naeem wandered the streets looking for somewhere to rent.  At the event my father had spoken 
passionately.  When my mother arrived, 
Hidayatullah had to move into the office and sleep on a hard wooden chair.  If they were 
going to kill me they would have done it in 2009, I said.  No Pashtun leaves his land of his own sweet will, she would say.  

Around that time my mother was probably just going through the doorway into our school for her 
first lesson since she had left school at age six.  She had hit him so hard 
that when she looked at the shoe it was broken.  And we were learning how powerful we are when we speak.  One day my father and I went to Peshawar to appear on a BBC Urdu talk show hosted by 
a famous columnist called Wasatullah Khan.  Our house has 
holes in the walls, and every plate and cup is cracked.  

At first we assumed our government had known and been involved in the American operation.  

When our bus was called, we ran down the steps.  Soon they had 
taken over many villages.  It sounded like a disease.  Its in the Kana 
dara, which is enclosed by craggy mountain walls and so narrow there is not even room for a cricket 
ground.  

When he heard the news my father said the earth fell away from his feet.  The year before I was born a group called the Taliban led by a oneeyed mullah had 
taken over the country and was burning girls schools.  

The most important part of the mock wedding was jewellery.  

The army action at the end of 2007 had not got rid of the Taliban.  My friends and I 
didnt want that day to end so we decided to stay on for a while longer.  He also spoke Persian and Arabic and cared 
deeply for words.  At 3 p.  But then he started up again.  

Having so many people around made it hard to study.  In the 1950s he ended the system where 
people paid taxes to the khans.  The 
women spent their days looking after the children and preparing food to serve to the men in their 
hujra upstairs.  My mother had had enough of the gunfire and tension and called Dr Afzal and begged him to 
persuade my father to leave.  

The next few hours were a waitandsee time, the nurses monitoring my heartbeat and vital signs.  An 
army major was assigned to my parents and followed them everywhere.  He and my 
father had studied for their bachelors and masters degrees in English together and were both 
passionate about education.  

Bin Laden and his men fled to the White Mountains of Tora Bora in eastern Afghanistan, where he 
had built a network of tunnels while fighting the Russians.  She was the only girl in a 
class of boys.  I think 
somehow I knew he was there even though my eyes were closed.  We hid our school bags and our books in our shawls.  When he became army 
chief the first thing General Kayani did was improve housing, food rations and education for ordinary 
soldiers rather than officers.  My palms were sweating and my 
mouth was as dry as paper.  She 
insisted we leave, but my father was exhausted and we Muslims believe our fate is written by God.  I thought we would never leave Swat and 
we were just about to.  My grandmother started 
crying and saying her life had never been so bad.  

When my father read it, he went pale.  Sometimes though she would be out because 
she was shopping for clothes in the Cheena Bazaar, and that would be a different matter.  He even dared to enter the Radio Mullahs own village one day to speak at a school.  After that I doublechecked all the locks every night.  Some thought my father had done it for 
me but Madam Maryam, our principal, told them, No.  I teased him that one of the reasons he called me Jani was because he 
found it easier to say than Malala.  He even asks his 
wife! they say as an insult.  And I almost gave the game away in one entry when I said, My 
mother liked my pen name Gul Makai and joked to my father we should change my name .  

In our province Maulana Sufi Mohammad, who had fought in Afghanistan against the Russians, 
issued a fatwa against the US.  

At night I would pray, God, give me Sanjus pencil.  He told people, I know there is something different about 
this child.  I noticed wherever he went he would 
look up and down the street four or five times.  

Within six months people were getting rid of their TVs, DVDs and CDs.  He palpated my spine and located the bullet lying next to my left shoulder blade.  By the roadside were fresh springs 
and waterfalls, and when we stopped for a break and to drink some tea, the air was clean and fragrant 
with cedar and pine.  Finally, they let us through.  My father does not respond well to being pushed and remained firm even though it was 
clear that by now he was creating havoc.  I agree that female teachers should educate girls, he said.  Many were 
slaughtered on trains which arrived at Lahore and Delhi full of bloodied corpses. m.  They wore black badges which said 
shariat ya shahadat sharia law or martyrdom and sometimes black turbans, so people 
called them Tor Patki or the Black Turbaned Brigade.  It was the biggest bomb ever to have gone off in our country.  I was the one who would help other pupils 
who had difficulties.  Its my duty to 
do so.  

When nightfall came, there were still tremors and my mother was in a state of panic.  

We were lucky our house had not been broken into.  

The first school to be blown up was Shawar Zangay, a government girls primary school in Matta.  We all started crying and praying for 
her.  He wanted tea all the time, our traditional tea with milk and sugar and cardamom, 
but even my mother tired of this and eventually made some so bitter that he lost the taste for it.  Besides he had seven other children to think about.  

It was in Spal Bandi that my father came across women who had great freedom and were not 
hidden away as in his own village.  

My father started teasing Atal, who was eight by then and cheekier than ever.  One day one of our Urdu teachers, Nawab Ali, told my father, I wont be coming to 



school tomorrow.  

Adam was astonished.  Because we were cut off from supply routes, what little food was available was 
extremely expensive.  
He used to read by the light of the oil lamp in the hujra, and one evening he went to sleep and the oil 
lamp fell over.  But it used to wee everywhere so that night we put it outside.  But it does not mean that.  It was a long slow journey and we were all very sweaty 
crammed in together.  

Afterwards, we found out that despite his youthful appearance he had been a neurosurgeon for 
thirteen years and was the most experienced and decorated neurosurgeon in the Pakistani army.  His execution shocked everybody and made Pakistan look bad all around the world.  I didnt mind; I just 
wanted to be friends.  We decided to spend the rest of the money on people who 
needed help.  They agreed to form a united front under the banner of TehrikiTalibanPakistan (TTP), or 
the Pakistan Taliban, and claimed to have 40,000 fighters between them They chose as their leader a 
man in his late thirties called Baitullah Mehsud, who had fought in Afghanistan.  The Taliban said girls could go to school after the peace agreement but they should be 
veiled and covered.  This means soulmate in Persian, and he always called me that at 
the start of the day.  My father quickly got 
involved in student politics and became known as a talented speaker and debater.  
The Taliban spokesman Muslim Khan then confirmed they had agreed an indefinite ceasefire.  I didnt enjoy shopping, unlike my mother, who liked beautiful clothes even though 
we didnt have much money.  We all watched in horror.  We would lie in bed 
listening to them boom boom all night.  President Obama 
was very happy, and on TV we watched big celebrations take place outside the White House.  Besides, soon the winter would be here, bringing the snow, which would cleanse and 
quieten everything.  They 
believed that as Muslims they would be defiled by drinking with her.  

Aba, you must give them free places at your school, I begged.  He promised 
he would make his own assets and tax return public.  Police once tried to capture Fazlullah when he was speaking at a gathering, but a giant 
sandstorm blew up and he managed to escape.  

I was speaking at a lot of events but because I was so short it wasnt easy to be authoritative.  We were very unhappy about the armys failure to 
capture the Taliban leadership, and my father and I continued to give lots of interviews.  Our guests need the bathroom and everyone is having 
to wait for you 

One of the worst times was the fasting month of Ramadan in 2008.  He followed me to the house and put a note inside our gate where I would see it.  But he said not to go would be cowardly.  My 
father fired him, but some other teachers were worried and sent a delegation to his office.  Her story was like something out of the novels I had started reading.  At first he 
thought it might be a brick factory, but as he approached he saw bearded figures in turbans burning 
TVs and computers.  Pashtuns cannot stand anyone belittling them, nor was he about to pay a 
bribe for something he was entitled to.  

One day my father went to visit a friend in hospital and found lots of patients listening to cassettes 
of Fazlullahs sermons.  Before then mullahs had almost been figures of fun my father said at wedding parties 
they would just hang around in a corner and leave early but under Zia they became influential and 
were called to Islamabad for guidance on sermons.  .  

Its like when one mixes milk with tea, I said.  

Malalai was the daughter of a shepherd in Maiwand, a small town on the dusty plains west of 
Kandahar.  Most 
Pashtun men never do this, as sharing problems with women is seen as weak.  The first meeting was in a hall with lots of 
politicians and activists.  He would probably say that this was not the country he had wanted.  

People used to talk about Shabanas bad character, but our men both wished to see her dance and 
also despised her because she was a dancer.  Miss Rubi, one of my favourite teachers, told us to stop crying and to stay 
calm; it would soon be over.  
They told my father that the police had turned up at the house and demanded to know whether we had 
received any threats.  Everything will be fine.  In our culture doctors dont explain 
things to patients or relatives, and my father asked humbly, If you dont mind, I have a stupid 
question.  There were 
two families in our village he could not convince.  

It was only when she met my father that she felt regret.  But finally I had persuaded her to let me grow it to my shoulders.  

For as long as I can remember my mother has talked to birds.  In Malalai we 
Pashtuns have our very own Joan of Arc.  However, he got a wealthy philanthropist, Azaday Khan, to pay 
for him to produce a leaflet asking, Kia hasool e elum in bachun ka haq nahe?  Is education not 
the right of these children? My father printed thousands of these leaflets, left them at local meetings 
and distributed them around town.  



My father could listen no more.  Instead they used the buildings for their 
hujras or even to keep their animals.  I am confused, 
Aba, I told my father.  

Many of our madrasas or religious schools were opened at that time, and in all schools religious 
studies, what we call deeniyat, was replaced by Islamiyat, or Islamic studies, which children in 
Pakistan still have to do today.  
They destroyed an entire brigade, one of the worst defeats in the history of the British army.  I wrinkled my nose as I approached, swatting away flies and making sure I didnt step 
on anything in my nice shoes.  After all these procedures I was put on a ventilator.  First our 
father and family, then our street, then our whole mohalla, then all Swat.  They had parachuted in 
soldiers and there had been handtohand fighting in the streets.  It happened in a 
manner so dramatic that it sounds like something out of a movie.  I never said those things to your clerk.  They told him that my national and international profile meant I had 
attracted attention and death threats from the Taliban and that I needed protection.  Atal was only five then and really loved that rabbit so it used to 
sleep under my parents bed.  
You can stay there accepting everything from the Taliban or you can make a stand against them 

My father told us what Hidayatullah had said.  It would have taken us at least two days by bus.  I was to be flown out of Pakistan for the first time in my life in the early hours 
of Monday, 15 October.  The plan was that Musharraf would finally take off his 
uniform and be a civilian president, supported by Benazirs party.  

Zahid Khan was in hospital for twelve days then at home recuperating for a month after having 
plastic surgery to repair his nose.  Over loudspeakers they called for the girls to surrender.  Osama bin Laden, 
the leader of alQaeda, had been living in Kandahar when the attack on the World Trade Center 
happened, and the Americans had sent thousands of troops to Afghanistan to catch him and overthrow 
the Taliban regime which had protected him.  Eighty people were killed including boys 
as young as twelve, some of whom had come from Swat.  By then I was used to meeting politicians.  

My fathers college held a heated debate in a packed room.  Children in the refugee camps were even given school textbooks produced by 
an American university which taught basic arithmetic through fighting.  

I dreamed I wasnt really in hospital.  Sometimes his men would display the fancy clothes that they said they had taken from 
decadent women to shame them.  Everyone wanted me in their family as I was from Mingora and 
modern.  My father and his friends were disgusted.  
My father tried to counter their propaganda but it was hard.  The important thing is what you learn 
from it.  Dont you think she is meant for the skies? Fathers 
can be very embarrassing.  

In Swat we began to see more signs that the Taliban had never really left.  I could not sleep until he returned and I could lock the gate.  Landslides blocked access to the worst affected 
parts and all the phones and power lines were down.  The rest of Swat is OK.  A hospital protected by the Taliban was not a good idea so he 
refused.  Hes not for peace; he wants more killing.  The MQM 
is a very organised movement, and the mohajir community sticks together.  We will defeat the forces 
of extremism and militancy with the power of the people, she declared to loud cheers.  That 
changing climate made Ghulamullah bold.  

My father was very impressed by Faiz Mohammad and thought he talked a lot of sense, particularly 
about wanting to end the feudal and capitalist systems in our country, where the same big families had 
controlled things for years while the poor got poorer.  

As we crossed the Malakand Pass I saw a young girl selling oranges.  Some people took sacks of sugar and flour, and most of the baggage was tied to the top of 
the bus in a towering pile.  

Things often seemed to happen around my birthday, and around the time I turned thirteen in July 
2010 the rain came.  My father says that Pakistan has been cursed with more than its fair share of politicians 
who only think about money.  In olden times Swat was called Uddyana, which means garden.  

One day a man from along the street came and told us that it had been announced in the mosques 
that there would be a curfew the next day.  Seduced, killed and blamed.  That day instead of a story he did a magic trick to make a 
pebble disappear.  At that time of day Haji Baba 
Road was always a jumble of coloured rickshaws, people on foot and men on scooters, all zigzagging 
and honking.  
All Pashtun children grow up with the story of how Malalai inspired the Afghan army to defeat the 
British in 1880 in one of the biggest battles of the Second Anglo Afghan War.  Go away! 

The mufti had failed to close our school but his interference was an indication of how our country 
was changing.  I asked, Two or three months ago you told us 
Fazlullah and his deputy were shot and injured, and then you said they were in Swat and sometimes 
you say theyre in Afghanistan.  When it was my mothers turn she said, I want to live in 
the city and be able to send out for kebabs and naan instead of cooking it myself.  It was the first Taliban attack on the police in our valley.  My parents never once suggested I 
should withdraw from school, ever.  Our neighbours said the Taliban 
were instructing people to make it known to the mosque if their daughters were unmarried so they 
could be married off, probably to militants.  I thought my school would not close and it had.  The real tomb is on the floor below, where he lies alongside his sister Fatima, 
who died much later.  When she was a teenager, both her father and the man she was supposed to marry were 
among thousands of Afghans fighting against the British occupation of their country.  Look, Atal, when 
Malala is prime minister, you will be her secretary, he said.  Their militants kidnapped 
policemen and ransacked government buildings.  The groups main objective 
was to liberate Kashmirs Muslims from Indian rule, but they had recently also become active in 
Afghanistan.  At school that day everyone was subdued, even those who had opposed Benazir.  
We had been left with no choice but to get involved in politics and campaign for education. / Either he leaves from 
poverty or he leaves for love.  This verse was recited by the prophet 
Yunus when he was in the tummy of the whale.  We worried about our family in Shangla, though my 
father said the village was too remote for the Taliban to bother with and local people had made it 
clear they would keep them out.  We are peaceloving.  

The Bloody Square 

The bodies would be dumped in the square at night so that everyone would see them the next 
morning on their way to work.  She refused even to be 
photographed.  
General Musharraf was in exile in London.  I think when there is a great disaster or our lives are in danger we remember our 
sins and wonder how we will meet God and whether we will be forgiven.  She still has lots to do.  My father raised money from the 
Swat Association of Private Schools and the Global Peace Council to add to what we had collected 
at school.  

A few days later, on 22 February, a permanent ceasefire was announced by Deputy 
Commissioner Syed Javid at the Swat Press Club in Mingora.  Only 
two escaped, and they fled to Peshawar along with their tribesmen.  We will be like preachers of education, I 
said.  The same is happening with Bajaur. 30 a.  It was the peach and onion season and farmers were desperate to save their 
harvests.  It became known as Mullah 
FM and Fazlullah as the Radio Mullah.  

Our area had always been more conservative than most of the rest of Pakistan.  Are you my friend or Ridas? I asked Moniba.  Although we had a computer, 
there were frequent power cuts and few places had Internet access.  

My mother gave them tea and food but that wasnt why they came.  Our men all have rifles, though these days they dont walk around with 
them like they do in other Pashtun areas, and my greatgrandfather used to tell stories of gun battles 
when he was a boy.  My fathers involvement in political discussions continued 
after college.  But his wife and younger brother stayed inside, along with many 
students, and there were daily exchanges of gunfire between the militants and the troops outside.  My father gave 
money instead and she was distraught, saying that wasnt the same.  Had they done so, he would have been electrocuted.  Moniba and I had been reading the Twilight books 
and longed to be vampires.  I wanted to go to Shangla with my father and the trucks but 
he told me it would be too dangerous.  He felt all these people were just 
waiting for me to die when they had done nothing to protect me.  Did all this fighting mean we needed 
to divide our country yet again? 

When we left the museum some young men with flags were protesting outside.  My father had felt so 
uncomfortable and scared because of the secrecy of all the arrangements, the men in uniform 
everywhere and the vulnerability of our family, that he had panicked and blown the incident out of 
proportion.  

Sufi Mohammad said nothing about education.  

Unlike my father, I took precautions.  They became voluntary IDPs.  My grandfather would not buy enough gold so my father had to borrow 
more money to buy bangles.  Some of the 
girls refused, saying their teachers had taught them that to become a martyr is a glorious thing.  

Muslim Khan said that Sangota was a convent school teaching Christianity and that Excelsior was 
coeducational, teaching girls and boys together.  We received other shocking news.  But when half of 
your leaders tell lies and the other half is negotiating with the Taliban, there is nowhere to go.  

There was no one to protect us.  You are the ones educating their children 

He soon became president of the organisation and expanded it until it included 400 principals.  

My father shares everything with my mother and there was no way he would keep such a thing 
secret.  She had known my father since she was ten and they 
trusted each other completely she used to signal to him to wind up when he spoke for too long, 
which was often! 

The secret school is our silent protest, she told us.  He even asked friends to throw dried fruits, sweets and coins into my cradle, something 
we usually only do for boys.  

Dr Fiona said it was likely I would have a speech impediment and a weak right arm and right leg, 
so I would need extensive rehabilitation facilities, which Pakistan didnt have.  Even so, Swat was our home and we were not ready to leave it.  He himself had been a political prisoner as well as a close ally of Benazir.  My mother was sitting on the floor pounding 
spices, brightly coloured turmeric and cumin, filling the air with their aroma.  People 
reassured my mother that although I had been shot in the head, the bullet had just skimmed my 
forehead.  He lives with us 
and has told his wife that she must observe purdah from us and that our wives must observe purdah 
from him, all in this small space.  During the night American special forces called Navy Seals had carried out a raid in 
Abbottabad, one of the places wed stayed as IDPs, and had found and killed Osama bin Laden.  Dr Shamsher had been an outspoken critic of the Taliban.  

My friends at school said their mothers listened to the Radio Mullah although our headmistress 
Madam Maryam told us not to.  I dont want keys, I want my daughter! my mother cried.  Malala is a genius girl, my class fellows would say.  She is only there to prove that Isa [Jesus] was the son of Maryam, not the 
son of God! 

That may be, replied my father.  Then 
his nephew Aziz, who had come to help, raised the Pakistan flag.  I was in Year 5 and some of us pretended we were younger than we were.  They liked it very much and told us they 
had a guesthouse in Abbottabad where we could all go.  Visitors can turn up 
whenever they wish and can stay as long as they want.  We liked performing plays.  I used to say the Ay at alKursi, the 
Verse of the Throne from the second surah of the Quran, the Chapter of the Cow.  We couldnt 
believe the army had been oblivious to bin Laden s whereabouts.  

Nobody consulted my mother and father on what should happen to me.  My father didnt understand what this meant.  

When I stand in front of my window and look out, I see tall buildings, long roads full of vehicles 
moving in orderly lines, neat green hedges and lawns, and tidy pavements to walk on.  My father was 
embarrassed and for once, short of words.  What kind of school is this? asked the official, 
laughing at his application.  Malala is now very sick, he told her.  It was 
leaning against the wall and I screamed as we lifted it.  The strangest sight of all was the bus station.  
Kill Malala and silence me for ever.  My relatives would ask me, Would you like to cook chicken for us? and Id 
say, No, the chicken is innocent.  Local people had no idea what it was back then we did not know that the 
Americans could do such a thing.  Were not going to operate at this stage.  

So I was born a proud daughter of Pakistan, though like all Swatis I thought of myself first as Swati 
and then Pashtun, before Pakistani.  Lets wait and see, he said.  

Eventually my mother interrupted him.  What we didnt know then was that bin Laden came to 
Swat and stayed in a remote village for a year, taking advantage of the Pashtunwali hospitality code.  As soon as she heard I had been shot she called her husband.  The previous tenants had also run a school the Ramada School.  Look instead to your own daughter.  Why not your 
own hospital? General Kayani asked.  Some believed the authorities were 
deliberately encouraging the Taliban.  It was, he says, the first thing Id done that made him smile.  What 
use are keys without Malala? Then they heard the sound of the helicopter.  Why are you afraid? he asked.  

It is my belief God sends the solution first and the problem later, replied Dr Javid.  This from a man 
who had lived so long in America! He insisted he would have his own education system.  When you want something all the universe conspires in helping you achieve 
it, it says.  You have put the first stone in standing water, they 
said.  Yet he says he was actually lucky.  My father was in favour of this.  They had no interest in developing Swat.  He told them that nowhere in Islam is this required.  

If you look at a map of Swat youll see it is one long valley with little valleys we call darae off to the 
sides like the branches of a tree.  I think of her as my big sister even though I am six months 
older than her.  Thats what all the tubes and machines were 
monitoring.  The numbers were unbelievable.  Her nephew Fazli Hakim had to carry my father on his shoulders.  The road left the river and wound 
up through narrow passes over steep firclad heights, higher and higher, until our ears popped.  Thats why he 
decided he would make his father proud by entering the districts annual public speaking competition.  But my government was reluctant to ask for fear of loss of face.  Normally there are new film releases for the 
holidays, but Fazlullah had closed the DVD shops.  

About a week later the army came to Swat, making lots of noise with their jeeps and helicopters.  We had no bathroom or kitchen, and my mother cooked on a wood 
fire on the ground and washed our clothes at a tap in the school.  Fazlullah kept broadcasting that girls should stay at home and his men had started 
blowing up schools, usually during nighttime curfew when the children were not there.  Luckily, Benazir survived because 
she had gone downstairs to an armoured compartment to rest her feet just before the explosions, but 
150 people had been killed.  I knew that any of the girls in my class could 
have achieved what I had achieved if they had had their parents support.  They acted as couriers for bin Laden.  Her husband was a policeman in 
the small town of Matta, and Fazlullah s men had stormed in and some police officers had been 
killed, including her husband.  

In reality what happened was we suddenly stopped.  

Maryam tried to find out more about what was going on.  In the far 
distance we could see the snows of Malam Jabba, our ski resort.  I wrote about being afraid to go to school because of the Taliban 
edict and looking over my shoulder all the time.  

My grandmother kept his spirits up he was her favourite and she believed great things lay in store 
for him.  We did not realise then that 9/11 would change our world 
too, and would bring war into our valley.  

There was more to school than work.  He told her the news with a heavy heart.  How was it possible that we were now garlanding murderers? 

Shortly after that my father got another death threat.  Many students argued that the book 
should be banned and burned and the fatwa upheld.  One of his friends went instead.  I 
was happy when the exam was over, chatting and gossiping with my friends as we waited for Sher 
Mohammad Baba, a school assistant, to call for us when the bus arrived.  His advice was 
to appeal to God and that He would answer our prayers.  
When a villager complained to her that he was flirting with a girl living across the road, she defended 
him.  A group of us girls 
gave an interview on ATV Khyber, the only privately owned Pashto television channel, about girls 
dropping out of school due to militancy.  I got so fed up with it that one day I told Atal to bring the boy inside.  

Lots of women were so moved by what Fazlullah said that they gave him gold and money, 
particularly in poor villages or households where the husbands were working abroad.  

When they got to the hospital the colonel told my father that if I was to be allowed to fly to the UK 
then there were other documents that needed to be signed.  He wanted a land of 
tolerance.  We also competed in what we call board exams.  

Finally we made it up onto Sky Turn, the gateway to Shangla Top, a mountain pass which feels as if 
its on top of the world.  

The Taliban destroyed the Buddhist statues and stupas where we played, which had been there for 
thousands of years and were a part of our history from the time of the Kushan kings.  

We heard about Shabanas death the next morning.  People hoped that the Taliban would settle down, go back to their 
homes and live as peaceful citizens.  I didnt say 
anything to my parents but whenever I went out I was afraid that Taliban with guns would leap out at 
me or throw acid in my face, as they had done to women in Afghanistan.  Then he insisted and I started to weep.  Why are you asking all these questions? he demanded.  His brother 
Maulana Liaquat, along with three of Liaquats sons, were among those killed in an American drone 
attack on the madrasa in Bajaur at the end of October 2006.  If we dont, she may die.  I 
was different I never hid my desire when I changed from wanting to be a doctor to wanting to be an 
inventor or a politician.  What skin 
cream are you using? I asked her.  The 
militants fled to the forests and by early December the army said they had cleared most areas.  Then she said, Hoo she yarV or 
Attention! and we clicked our heels again.  Ignorance allowed politicians to fool people and 
bad administrators to be reelected.  Every night my father would pray to God, O Allah, please make war 
between Muslims and infidels so I can die in your service and be a martyr.  Instead he would tell his best 
students to keep their old books for my father at the end of the year and then he would be sent to their 
homes to get them.  You may belong to any religion or caste or creed that has nothing to do with 



the business of the state.  

The original idea for the documentary had been to follow my father on the last day of school, but at 
the end of the meeting Irfan asked me, What would you do if there comes a day when you cant go 
back to your valley and school? I said this wouldnt happen.  

At night our fear is strong, Jani, he told me, but in the morning, in the light, we find our courage 
again.  Running a school is not a crime, he told them.  Those from my class were me, Moniba, MalkaeNoor, 
Rida, Karishma and Sundus, and we were chaperoned by my mother and Madam Maryam 

We left for the capital on Independence Day, 14 August, and travelled by bus, everyone brimming 
with excitement.  There was a lot of construction going on to build a 
new tower block.  

Oof, I was so happy, by God, says my father.  

We were watching the TV when the news came through.  I have a father who isn t scared, who stands by me.  A 
teenage girl wearing a black burqa and red trousers was lying face down on the ground being flogged 
in broad daylight by a bearded man in a black turban.  They believed 
any statue or painting was haram, sinful and therefore prohibited.  I was worried about losing even more marks so I made myself coffee with milk to drive 
away the devils of sleep.  Islam teaches us to treat women politely, he said.  

We were in school when the floods started and were sent home.  The news showed shocking pictures of the wreckage, everywhere blood and 
broken glass, and dead bodies.  

My father was scared and my uncle kept saying, Be very careful some of these people might be 
secret agents.  He did not 
believe in badal revenge and would try to make people see that neither side had anything to gain 
from continuing the violence, and it would be better for them to get on with their lives.  

I admired his mind, she says.  
There were suicide bombings all over the country: even the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad had been 
blown up.  They werent particularly tasty fish.  All the principals from the 
meeting had arrived at the hospital and there were scores of media and activists; it seemed the whole 
town was there.  

It was not easy to get from Besham to our village and we had to walk twentyfive kilometres 
carrying all our things.  Others said that the flogging had taken place in 
January, before the peace deal, and had been released now to sabotage it.  



I cant take any more! 

By this time the two former friends were hardly speaking to each other and had to call in local 
elders to mediate.  I had shared a cake with my friends.  Then he wrote up my words and once a week they 
would appear on the BBC Urdu website.  

But none of those people had to live here.  

It was 24 July 2009, a week after our prime minister had announced that the Taliban had been 
cleared out.  I was happy to be with my cousin 
Sumbul, who is a year older than me.  We stayed in a guesthouse and did 
lots of workshops on how to tell our stories so people outside would know what was going on in our 
valley and help us.  Five days after I got the award, Aunt Babo, my mothers eldest 
sister, died suddenly.  He was also an imam at the local mosque.  They helped 
clear and rebuild destroyed villages as well as leading prayers and burying bodies.  They didnt call themselves Taliban to start with and didnt look like the 
Afghan Taliban wed seen in pictures with their turbans and blackrimmed eyes.  Safina said nothing about my phone, which didnt seem fair, but I didnt 
mention it either.  

Ziauddin was a family man and they were unusually close, said Hidayatullah.  We passed nine resolutions 
calling for an end to child labour and asking for help to send the disabled and street children to 
school, as well as for the reconstruction of all the schools destroyed by the Taliban.  In Pakistan, madrasas are a kind of welfare system as they give free food and lodging, 
but their teaching does not follow a normal curriculum.  They even took control of 
the famous shrine of a Sufi saint, Pir Baba, which was a pilgrimage site.  A girl is so sacred she should be in 
purdah, and so private that there is no ladys name in the Quran as God doesnt want her to be 
named.  

Under Zias regime life for women in Pakistan became much more restricted.  

We were all at risk from a Taliban attack.  The ISI chief 
asked the Americans to hold off their attack on Afghanistan until he had gone to Kandahar to ask the 
Taliban leader Mullah Omar to hand over bin Laden; instead he offered the Taliban help.  We have lost so many of the precious lives of our soldiers and this is due to 
your negligence.  Im no less than Malala.  Thirty four of our fortytwo bridges had been washed 
away, cutting off much of the valley.  The Americans were worried the deal meant surrender.  My mother took me to say sorry to Safina and 
her parents.  

I know my mother didnt like the awards because she feared I would become a target as I was 
becoming more well known.  A nice lady in a headscarf held my hand and said, Asalaamu alaikum which is 
our traditional Muslim greeting.  No Pakistani, including my father, thought this deal would 
work as Musharraf and Benazir hated each other.  What are you 
doing in there PishoT my mother would shout.  At night I used to pray a lot.  Pekai, help me resolve my contusion on this, he 
would say.  It 
was an astonishing example of Pashtun hospitality.  In our culture women are 
expected not to mix with men they are not related to.  

Shiza wanted to introduce us to influential people.  They looked so dark and dirty that my fathers 
friend described them as people deprived of baths and barbers.  

Usman Bhai Jan started the dyna and we were off.  



When he met his fellow activists, particularly his old friends Ahmad Shah, Mohammad Farooq and 
Zahid Khan, I often went with him Ahmad Shah also had a school, where Mohammad Farooq 
worked, and they would sometimes gather on his lawn.  But after a while 
the school started to break even and my father began to plan a second school, which he wanted to call 
the Malala Education Academy.  Some people even laughed, including a local political leader sitting in the 
front row.  Her family had moved to 
Karachi to get away from the conflict and, as a woman, she could not live alone.  When a man tried to help her she refused and said.  

Afterwards General Abbas gave some of us his visiting card and told us to contact him if we ever 
needed anything.  We held a conference of 
twentyone girls and made our priority education for every girl in Swat with a particular focus on 
street children and those in child labour.  
The teachers were so happy.  I quickened my pace and after a 
while I looked back to see if he was following me.  All those deadlines theyd given at the beginning when they said the next 
twentyfour hours were dangerous, fortyeight were crucial, seventytwo were critical had all 



passed without incident.  
His phone kept ringing.  Why was Zahid Khan attacked if theres peace? Who attacked him? they demanded.  Sufi Mohammad had been in jail since 2002 when Musharraf arrested a number of 
militant leaders after American pressure, but his organisation still continued and was being run by his 
soninlaw Maulana Fazlullah.  Faqir had a $200,000 bounty on his head yet there 
he was sitting in a government officials house having dinner.  I wont tell anyone.  The shack had just two rooms, one where Hidayatullah and my father 
slept and one which was a small office.  In our case it 
happened to be a whitebearded militant called Sufi Mohammad.  My father had 
turned his weakness into strength.  One of the wives was from Swat! 

The Seals had shot bin Laden in the head and his body had been flown out by helicopter.  

We know what happened there.  

The first thing I thought when I came round was, Thank God Im not dead.  

Pashruns are famously frugal (though generous with guests), and Baba was particularly careful with 
money.  They set up volunteer traffic police called Falcon 
Commandos, who drove through the streets with machine guns mounted on top of their pickup trucks.  Shabana was not a Muslim, they said.  So our blood boiled over the Soviet invasion for both 
religious and nationalist reasons.  
Afterwards I went on as many radio and TV channels as possible.  In the bazaar you could buy posters 
of him on a white horse and boxes of sweets with his picture on them.  He also removed clots from my 
brain and the bullet from my shoulder blade.  These are bad days.  He immediately thought, Malala could be on that bus! 
Then he tried to reassure himself, thinking it might be a boy, a jealous lover who had fired a pistol in 
the air to shame his beloved.  Almost two million of them were killed trying to cross the new border.  

Down below, my mother was watching from the roof of our house.  There were also giant posters pasted on the front of the mosque with the 
same accusations.  

The road was heaving with traffic.  He had asked for my fathers advice.  

My father knew what he was referring to.  Malala is not just the daughter of Ziauddin, they would say; she is the daughter of all of 
us.  We 
did another paper at school to see who would get the prize and again we got equal marks.  She 
was relieved to see us and hugged us, tears streaming down her face.  We are supposed to be collecting money in enrolment 
fees.  Two more schools were 
blown up and three foreign aid workers from a Christian group were kidnapped as they returned to 
their base in Mingora and then murdered.  The mohajirs almost all support a party called the MQM led by 
Altaf Hussain, who lives in exile in London and communicates with his people by Skype.  After my father had graduated from 
school he had nothing to do so he volunteered to help his brother.  Her eyes would not meet mine.  Later her diary was published and is a very powerful record.  1 congratulate her.  Then the Radio Mullah turned his attention to schools.  The shop would then 
sell it on at a profit.  

They killed Shabana on a bitterly cold night in January 2009.  There was a major problem, however.  He told 
other boys to stop playing marbles in the dust and to play cricket instead so their clothes and hands 
wouldnt get dirty.  It was 
also a way to answer growing American criticism that our military was helping the Taliban rather 
than trying to stop them.  The only charity they know is to give to mosque and madrasa.  

There were a lot of us not just us five but also my grandmother, my cousin, his wife, Honey, and 
their baby.  You saved this womans husband but not your own house! he said.  I was astonished to see so many channels.  They are 
now refugees and theyre living with us.  When we decorated our hands 
with henna for holidays and weddings, we drew calculus and chemical formulae instead of flowers 
and butterflies.  

It took a while for us to realise how bad it was.  No one 
doubted they were serious.  Within an hour of the announcement on television of Musharraf s sacking, tanks were on the 
streets and troops had taken over the newsrooms and the airports.  He was going to Besham, from where we would need 
another lift to take us to Shangla.  



17 

Praying to Be Tall 



When i was thirteen I stopped growing.  I was also known for 
participating in everything badminton, drama, cricket, art, even singing, though I wasnt much good.  Finally on the evening of 3 July 
commandos with tanks and armoured personnel carriers surrounded the mosque.  He 
crossed the river in one of the metal boxes suspended from a pulley that we use as makeshift bridges.  I drummed my fingers.  My grandfather, Janser Khan, had been listening to Radio Afghanistan just 
before she was born and heard the name.  My valley, the Swat Valley, is a heavenly 
kingdom of mountains, gushing waterfalls and crystalclear lakes, welcome to paradise, it says on a 
sign as you enter the valley.  I read that Benazir Bhutto insisted on wearing glass 
bangles at her wedding to set an example but the tradition of adorning the bride still continued.  In the morning 
the sun reflected off the top of Tor Ghar; when we got up for the fajr prayers, the first of our five 
daily prayers, we would look left and see the golden peak of Spin Ghar lit with the first rays of the 
sun like a white lady wearing a jumar tika a gold chain on her forehead.  I never noticed before how beautiful her eyes 
are, said Maryam.  Madam Maryam was a strict 
headmistress.  One of the school clerks told my father that the mufti kept 
coming into school and demanding why we girls were still using the main entrance.  Ziauddin is as clean as an egg with no hair, she said.  For some reason my 
fathers keys would not work so we found a boy who climbed over the wall and opened it from the 
inside.  

All too soon it was another year of exams.  

One day I saw my little brother Atal digging furiously in the garden.  But my grandfather knew that his cousin was actually much older than him.  Soon everyone seemed to be talking about the radio station.  It seemed to me that before Pakistan there was endless fighting between Hindus and Muslims.  They 
retreated after just twelve days and reached what they called a negotiated peace settlement with 
local militant leaders like Nek Mohammad.  Dr Fiona 
is right because the nurses put eye drops in Malalas eyes.  

Once the shaking had stopped we were all sent home.  
Her father said nothing.  To 
make us wash, our aunts told stories about a scary woman called Shashaka, who would come after 
you with her muddy hands and stinking breath if you didnt take a bath or wash your hair, and turn you 
into a dirty woman with hair like rats tails filled with insects.  

I knew that could not be true.  You must go.  It made me think 
of old war movies or the video games my brother Khushal loves to play.  The Muttahida Majlis eAmal (MMA) alliance was 
a group of five religious parties including the Jamiat UlemaeIslam (JUI), which ran the madrasas 
where the Taliban were trained.  The militants simply used the cash to buy more weapons and resumed 
their activities.  Actually some people thought it got worse.  He and his family lived 
with my grandfather, and whenever he saved up enough of his salary, they built a small concrete hujra 
at the side of the house for guests.  When Sorayas family found out about the union they were furious.  Khalid Sheikh Mohammad, the mastermind of 9/ 1 1 , was found in a house just a mile 
from the army chief s official residence in Rawalpindi.  

Dr Afzal did not live far from us, so once we were safely home, my father insisted on going back 



with him in case he was targeted by the Taliban.  They 
were keeping the cars in lines but with weapons not whistles.  She even helped whitewash the school walls, holding up the lanterns so they could paint 
when the light went off in power cuts.  My mother made our usual breakfast of sugary tea, 
chapatis and fried egg.  When we reached Mingora 
we were shocked.  

Hes actually a highschool dropout whose real name isnt even Fazlullah, my father retorted, but 
they wouldnt listen.  

Later that day we visited my aunt and uncle.  When our bus hit a pothole on the way back my brother 
Khushal, who had been asleep, jerked awake.  In the next room was a soldier who had been horrifically burned in an IED attack 
and had a leg blown off.  My father joked that our home had become a boarding house.  He was 
also the president of the All Swat Hotels Association, so he was particularly eager for life to go back 
to normal so that tourists could return.  I couldnt space letters.  If anything he became more outspoken, 
particularly against the intelligence agencies, as he was convinced they were behind the Taliban.  Her mother, my grandmother, had looked after all eight children 
alone after my grandfather had an accident and broke his pelvis and could not leave his bed for eight 
years.  There 
was much more to come.  If shes on her own with two boys 
in Mingora, anything could happen to them! 

My father called the colonel.  All the children gathered around our teachers as chicks swarm to 
a mother hen.  Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham is known for 
treating British soldiers wounded in Afghanistan and Iraq.  Whats wrong with you people? he asked Irfan and my father.  Drip, drip, drip.  

In 1949, two years after the creation of Pakistan, he abdicated in favour of his elder son Miangul 
Abdul Haq Jehanzeb.  

We started to receive text messages asking us to rally in the streets and show our support of the 
army.  When I complained about my 
books my brothers whined about their chickens.  He couldnt bear the thought of being killed in 
front of us.  It 
wasnt really a march but a cavalcade of cars.  But when they went 
there to look for a building, there were banners everywhere advertising a school opening someone 
had beaten them to it.  It was just one question worth only one mark, but it made me feel that 
something devastating was going to happen.  
There were balloons and I had made the same wish I was making on my twelfth birthday, but this time 
there was no cake and there were no candles to blow out.  It does not matter what language you choose, the important 
thing is the words you use to express yourself.  

Though I felt bad, I was also relieved it was over.  Let them be illiterate.  We should focus on practical 
issues.  

No one I knew had been to Islamabad.  Afghanistan is less 
than a hundred miles away, but to get there you have to go through Bajaur, one of the tribal areas 
between Pakistan and the border with Afghanistan.  

For him the closing of the schools also meant the loss of business.  We drove to Islamabads twin city of Rawalpindi to see him in his 



office.  



PART THREE 



Three Girls.  When 
the NGOs received threatening letters from the Taliban and went to the DC to ask for his help, he 
wouldnt even listen to them.  The Americans were worried that their ally 
General Musharraf was too unpopular in Pakistan to be effective against the Taliban so they had 
helped broker an unlikely powersharing deal.  

Atal got very cross.  

The guard explained that the tomb in the main room under a giant chandelier from China did not 
contain Jinnahs body.  You should 
close it.  
Fortunately, many of his family live in the same area and they exchanged fire with the attackers, 
forcing them to flee.  

In the morning my parents came to my room as usual and woke me up.  

That summer there was only one topic of conversation in my class.  In truth the tribal areas are not governed at 
all.  But now they seemed to be more 
alarmed about Pakistan than Afghanistan.  The few concrete houses had 
been built by families whose sons or fathers had gone south to work in the mines or to the Gulf, from 
where they sent money home.  It was always our 
mother who shopped for our clothes and took us to hospital if we were ill, even though in our culture, 
particularly for those of us from villages, a woman is not supposed to do these things alone.  I am only one small man 


The Autumn of the Earthquake 



One fine October day when I was still in primary school our desks started to tremble and shake.  I could 
listen endlessly to the story of how they met.  



We remembered how scared we had been that morning and started raising money at school.  Sultana was very shorttempered and my mother did not like having 



her in the house, but my father arranged a small allowance for her and a place for Shehnaz and her 
other brother at his school.  The 
teachers at the Khushal School demanded something.  There was a plum tree in our front yard which 
gave the most delicious fruit.  The Marghazar stream loops through it, milky brown from the plastic bags 
and rubbish thrown into it.  I was a girl in a land where 
rifles are fired in celebration of a son, while daughters are hidden away behind a curtain, their role in 
life simply to prepare food and give birth to children.  Though she cannot read or write, my father shares everything with 
her, telling her about his day, the good and the bad.  
Shiza introduced us to women who were lawyers and doctors and also activists, which showed us 
that women could do important jobs yet still keep their culture and traditions.  The name was ironic and my father often 
laughed about it, but the organisations aim was serious: to preserve the environment of Swat and 
promote peace and education among local people.  He said they 
had told him, Either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists, and threatened to bomb us back 
to the Stone Age if we stood against them.  I walked off with two other girls she didnt 
like.  I have three good friends Safina 
from my area, Sumbul from the village and Moniba from school.  It was as though they wanted to remove all traces of womankind 
from public life.  Usman Bhai Jan, our driver, made us laugh 
as usual.  She asked when my 
blood pressure had last been checked.  Up there we were higher than the rocky peaks all around us.  He did not mention he could not afford to take it as he did not want to 
embarrass his father.  Around the time of Shabanas murder every day seemed like the 
worst day; every moment was the worst.  At the time I had 
thought it was a stupid question, but now I saw that everything I could not imagine happening had 
happened.  In my heart was the belief that God would protect 
me.  They want to interview a small girl, but the girls are scared, and even if theyre 



not, their parents won t allow it.  


Growing up in a School 



My mother started school when she was six and stopped the same term She was unusual in the 
village as she had a father and brothers who encouraged her to go to school.  My mother and father sat outside the operating theatre.  Was the deal merely an illusion? she 
wondered.  



Some of Jinnahs most famous speeches were displayed.  And we saw the 
sights.  This caused a big problem because I was a minor so couldnt be sent alone and many people 
got involved to try and convince my father to come with me, including Colonel Junaid, Dr Javid and 
Dr Fiona.  They said there had been a big attack on a building in New York.  There wasnt time to fetch my mother so 
Maryam insisted she would go too as I might need a womans help.  When we found peaches for sale we were so 
happy.  It is a very beautiful letter, full of good advice.  

It was about 5.  Even for the adults it was 
hard to imagine the biggest buildings in Swat are the hospital and a hotel, which are two or three 
storeys.  Many of his classes were taught under a tree 
on the bare ground.  Many people were scared.  I shivered when he told me such things.  I was on the way to meet him with my parents when 
we were approached by a short man who was frantically talking on two different phones.  

They were still patrolling the Cheena Bazaar.  He would endlessly 
point out to my father that life on earth was short and that there were few opportunities for young men 
in the village.  Policemen 
were so scared of being killed that they took out adverts in the newspapers to announce they had left 



the force.  CMH is a large sprawling brick 
hospital with 600 beds and dates from British rule.  Though later he became less regular in his 
prayers, in those days he used to leave home at dawn every morning to walk to a mosque in another 
village, where he studied the Quran with a senior talib.  

Then I went and sat on my bed.  Then Maryam would say, 
Malala, Malala.  

My fathers friend Hidayatullah had become a government official in Peshawar and warned us, 



This is how these militants work.  
Then he asked, Please, can you bring in Dr Mumtaz? 

How would that look? replied Colonel Junaid who was, not surprisingly, offended.  

When I was put in the ambulance my father was afraid the Taliban would attack again.  On Mullah FM, Fazlullah said she deserved to 
die for her immoral character and any other girls found performing in Banr Bazaar would be killed 
one by one.  They had jogging shoes or 
cheap plastic sandals on their feet, and sometimes stockings over their heads with holes for their eyes, 
and they blew their noses dirtily into the ends of their turbans.  People liked this as justice was 
speedy, unlike in Pakistani courts, where you could wait years and have to pay bribes to be heard.  Was 
it because of the cry of a woman? 

When the waters receded, they found their home and school destroyed: their furniture, carpets, 
books, clothes and the audio system entirely caked in thick foulsmelling mud.  But once inside he 



was told, We need someone to get blood from the blood bank.  When he came back and found out 
she had given away her gold he was furious.  It 
was very sad as in the end the family was betrayed and arrested and Anne died in a concentration 
camp when she was only fifteen.  At one the 
information minister for our province said Talibanisation was the result of our countrys policy of 
training militants and sending them to Afghanistan, first to fight the Russians, then to fight the 
Americans.  There was little to do.  
But lots of people called to congratulate him.  My fathers hand 
shook as he signed the consent papers.  The only 
targets now are peacebuilders and civilians.  

Colonel Junaid examined me.  

Once again, another official was called to talk to him.  It was such a 
small discount that most teachers did not bother, but he forced my father to apply for the rebate.  

The only practice wed had was reading out poems at morning assembly, but there was an older 
girl at school called Fatima who was a very good speaker.  But I was more concerned with matters closer to home our own street to 
be exact.  I used to go to her house to study, so whenever I was there I would 
pocket her things, mostly toy jewellery like earrings and necklaces.  As it was, Jinnah died in September 1948 just over a year later.  It seemed that people had decided the Taliban were here to stay and they had better get along 
with them.  The phone did not stop ringing.  Women had been kept in purdah, schools and bridges had been blown up, businesses had 
closed.  

We were all at home that morning.  She had never seen the sea before.  but your country faces a lot of problems.  After the operation, first we will have recovery, then 
rehabilitation, then hold and transfer to civil authorities.  

The next day we got a lift to Abbottabad, where my grandmothers family lived.  He 
ordered Karachi airport to switch off its landing lights and to park fire engines on the runway to block 
the plane even though it had 200 other passengers on board and not enough fuel to get to another 
country.  He was very concerned because at that time Khushal was still in Mingora, although later he 
was brought down to Rawalpindi to join them.  A khans daughter cant marry a barbers son and a 
barbers daughter cant marry a khans son.  Many girls schools in Afghanistan are named after her.  God, I entrust her to You, she said to the heavens.  Wed be expected to cook and serve our 
brothers and fathers.  My father was told that even my brothers would not be 
spared.  Fortunately another old college friend called 
Hidayatullah stepped in and agreed to put up the money and take Naeems place.  Baba had beautiful handwriting 
and my father would spend hours painstakingly drawing letters but Baba never once praised him.  There were already too many 
conspiracy theories floating around about my shooting, people saying I was a CIA agent and such 
things, and the army chief did not want to further fuel them This left Dr Javid in a difficult position.  Underneath were the rotting heads of goats.  This was a bit different when we wrote about subjects close to our hearts these 
were topics like extremism and the Taliban rather than clothes and hairstyles.  This time they would clear the town.  

Musharraf told our people that he had no choice but to cooperate with the Americans.  
Everyone thought he was mad.  We had a new 
government under President Asif Zardari, the widower of Benazir, but they didnt seem to care about 
Swat.  

In our society marriages are usually arranged by families, but theirs was a love match.  

Around that time we moved away from where we had been living on the same street as Moniba to 
an area where I didnt have any friends.  If anything the Taliban became even more barbaric.  

When my mother arrived they hugged and held back tears.  Fingers were even pointed at my father.  The worst thing that can happen to a Pashtun is loss of face.  But a smaller 
group believed that leadership should have stayed within the Prophets family and that Ali, his sonin 
law and cousin, should have taken over.  You should have set an example.  No one knew where he got the cement and iron 
bars from but the workforce was local.  At that time talib simply meant religious 
student.  
Chinese explorers wrote stories of how there were 1,400 Buddhist monasteries along the banks of the 
River Swat, and the magical sound of temple bells would ring out across the valley.  Then he did a 
tracheotomy as he was worried the swelling was blocking my airway.  Why hasnt he been caught? 
Afterwards people told him to be very careful.  Foreign governments pointed out that most of our politicians werent 
paying any income tax, so it was a bit much to ask hardpressed taxpayers in their own countries to 
contribute.  I wore more fashionable clothes and didnt cover my 
face even when I became a teenager.  Children sometimes froze to death in winter.  We took earrings, bangles and 
necklaces to decorate the bride, singing Bollywood songs as we worked.  Roads, crops and entire villages were washed away.  Since that day I have never lied or stolen.  Malala is of Maiwand and shes the happiest person in the whole 
world.  The journey was just two hours, 
which I found incredible.  One girl felt my neck for a pulse.  Whatever you thought about Nek Mohammad, we were not at war 
with the Americans and were shocked that they would launch attacks from the sky on our soil.  

My father was in awe of my grandfather and told me wonderful stories about him, but he also told 
me that he was a man who could not meet the high standards he set for others.  I was still 
trying to get my head round the fact that she had been living in the seaside city of Karachi for thirty 
years and yet had never actually laid eyes on the ocean.  Its a big question for the army and administration.  I told my best friend Moniba everything.  

Sufi Mohammad was sitting on the stage with a long queue of people waiting to pay homage.  There was usually a note pinned to them saying something like, This is 
what happens to an army agent, or Do not touch this body until 11 a.  They used the big hall in the mosque, where they taught more than a 
hundred children ranging from five to fifteen years old.  
In a city of twenty million people is there not one person who will take this down? 

There was one important place we had to include in our visit to Karachi besides our outings to the 
sea or the huge bazaars, where my mother bought lots of clothes.  Even so, some teachers still gave us homework.  

Go wherever you want, he told my mother and cousin.  At least Ill be killed alone.  

There was little to do in my fathers village.  I dreamed of going to the top of Mount Elum like Alexander the Great to touch Jupiter and even 
beyond the valley.  We 



can pray to God.  They praised Fazlullah and talked 
of his long hair, the way he rode a horse and behaved like the Prophet. 

Just in front of the school on Khushal Street, where I was born, was the house of a tall handsome 
mullah and his family.  People would 
say they were two sides of the same coin.  We are told that Swat is 
being sacrificed for the sake of Pakistan, but no one and nothing should be sacrificed for the state.  This involved the army bribing them to halt all attacks 
and keep out foreign fighters.  Mama, he wept, Malala is hurt so badly.  They barricaded 
themselves and the madrasa students inside concrete bunkers with sandbags.  

Wherever we lived my mother filled our house with people.  People jokingly referred to the MMA as the Mullah Military 
Alliance and said they got elected because they had Musharraf s support.  What if they make a mess in the car? she asked.  He said, You 
are a child and it s your right to speak.  Nawaz Sharif was prime minister at 
the time and had fallen out with his army chief General Pervez Musharraf and sacked him.  Jinnah said, No 
struggle can ever succeed without women participating side by side with men.  I was 
upset and recalled how different my eleventh birthday had been.  They are rich and we are a poor country yet they loot and loot.  They 
felt incomplete without me.  In our society for a girl to flirt with 
any man brings shame on the family, though its all right for the man.  We will be buried in our beds! she cried.  

My father sent food and aid to Shangla using money collected by friends and the Swat Association 
of Private Schools.  We will all follow in a few 
days when the documents are sorted out.  I entrust her to you 



As soon as Usman Bhai Jan realised what had happened he drove the dyna to Swat Central Hospital 
at top speed.  Madam Maryam had even got married so she could stay in Swat.  
Everyone thinks they can open a school just like that! 

The other people in the office laughed along, ridiculing him My father was angry.  But I never listened to my interviews.  In Pakistan we had had a woman prime minister and in Islamabad I had met those impressive 
working women, yet the fact was that we were a country where almost all the women depend entirely 
on men.  

This didnt mean we went easy on the army.  

After the threats against me my mother didnt like me walking anywhere and insisted I get a rickshaw 
to school and take the bus home even though it was only a fiveminute walk.  The only way to cross the river is by rope bridges 
or on a pulley system by which people swing themselves across in a metal box.  A few more minutes, Aba, please, Id beg, then burrow deeper under the quilt.  He brought logs back from the mountains for firewood, and after 
teaching he would work in the fields where our family had a few buffaloes.  The Americans said that bin Laden s deputy Ayman alZawahiri was 
hiding in Bajaur and had taken a wife there.  Khushal had his appendix out too.  The 
Taliban became the enemy of fine arts, culture and our history.  We were grateful to the army but 
couldnt understand why they were still everywhere, in machinegun nests on roofs and manning 
checkpoints.  He arrested our elected prime minister, Zulfikar 
Ali Bhutto, and had him tried for treason then hanged from a scaffold in Rawalpindi jail.  He had 
called Khushal, and together they joined the weeping.  Then we crammed in, fighting over the window seats even though the panes 
were so encrusted with dirt it was hard to see out of them The sides of Swat buses are painted with 
scenes of bright pink and yellow flowers, neonorange tigers and snowy mountains.  But his wife died young 
and was a Parsee, and their only daughter Dina stayed in India and married a Parsee, which didnt sit 
very well in the new Muslim homeland.  

As a respected man in the community, my father was often called on to mediate feuds.  It seemed to 
him that everyone must know who was inside.  In 
our culture orphans are usually taken in by the extended family, but the earthquake was so bad that 
entire families had been wiped out or lost everything so were in no position to take in children.  Jinnah lived there and made it our first capital, and it was soon 
flooded by millions of Muslim refugees from India known as mohajirs, which means immigrants, 
who spoke Urdu.  He 
had been living in a large walled compound less than a mile from our military academy.  Helicopters were a rare sight in 
Swat, but since our house was close to the local army headquarters they sometimes flew right over us.  Prime Minister 
Yusuf Raza Gilani called for an inquiry and made a statement saying the flogging of the girl was 
against the teachings of Islam.  
What you did was wrong, Malala, she said.  My feeling was that nobody can stop death; it doesnt matter if it comes from a 
talib or cancer.  
Three children is a small family by Swati standards, where most people have seven or eight.  It was a 
time of horror and fear.  I have a school, but I am neither a khan nor a political leader.  

One day I went on Geo, which is one of the biggest news channels in our country.  And schools were expected to treat officials regularly to a good lunch of chicken or trout from 
the river.  For a while my father did this but stopped 
when he realised that although a falcon flies high it is a cruel bird.  

On 5 May 2009 we became IDPs.  

The streets were jampacked.  

Dr Javid asked to see my father privately.  You two always argue when theres an important occasion! 
they said.  Some people 
said that Fazlullah had been captured but that the army and the ISI couldnt agree on what to do with 
him.  It was both odd and wonderful to see my name on a school just like my namesake 
Malalai of Maiwind, after whom so many schools in Afghanistan are named.  People often said the Taliban might kill my father but not me.  This time all anyone talked about was how bad the food was.  Hill station resorts like Malam Jabba, 
Madyan and Bahrain were devastated, their hotels and bazaars in ruins.  It seemed very far away.  The Pakistan army had far more men and heavy weapons so they 
quickly managed to recapture the valley.  My father wrote a poem, The 
Relics of Butkara, which summed up perfectly how temple and mosque could exist side by side: 
When the voice of truth rises from the minarets,/ The Buddha smiles,/ And the broken chain of 
history reconnects.  If there is an entry there has to be an exit, he 
said.  We 
saw pictures on the news of what people were calling the Burqa Brigade young women and girls 
like us in burqas with sticks, attacking CD and DVD shops in bazaars in the centre of Islamabad.  Id go outside and make sure the front gate was locked.  As we skipped 
through, we cast off our head scarves like winds puffing away clouds to make way for the sun then 
ran helterskelter up the steps.  You just splashed water and took pictures, 
so dont be scared.  In August we had our first case of cholera in Mingora and soon there was a tent of patients 
outside the hospital.  My father heard that many of the boys were taken in by the JuD and housed in 
their madrasas.  He didnt tell the Taliban to lay down their arms and 
leave the hujras.  They were mostly boys 
although eleven girls from my school went along.  



General Kayani and General Ahmad Shuja Pasha, the head of ISI, were called to testify in 
parliament, something that had never happened.  Some fifty men deserted from the Frontier Corps and another fortyeight were 
captured and then paraded around.  He watched paralysed with fear as they almost 
touched the water.  
Sometimes there was a boy called Haroon with them, who was a year older than me and used to live 
on our street.  Until I was eight or nine my mother used to cut my hair short 
like my brothers because of lice and also to make it easier to wash and brush as it would get messed 
up under my shawl.  

We had begun to think about other things besides the Taliban, but it wasnt possible to forget 
completely.  My only 
ambition, he said, is to educate my children and my nation as much as I am able.  But they heard nothing.  He went there by bus, and it seemed so big 
to him compared to his home village that he thought hed arrived in a city.  His own 
education in Delhi had been free he had lived like a talib in the mosques, and local people had 
provided the students with food and clothes.  You are as vulnerable and as wanted a target as he is.  To be torn from the country that you love is not something to wish on anyone.  The girls will enter through that.  But then some of my parents friends had lost a relative 
in gunfire so they went to the house to offer prayers of condolences even though nobody was really 
venturing out.  Look, Ziauddin, he said.  

He began by telling us about the military operation in Swat, which he presented as a victory.  How could something like that happen in our capital city and in a mosque? A 
mosque is a sacred place for us.  There was mud, mud, mud 
everywhere.  Once we were settled I started going to school with her.  Then 
she asked my father, Did you know, Ziauddin, that the Taliban have threatened this innocent girl? 
We didnt know what she was talking about so she went on the Internet and showed us that the 
Taliban had that day issued threats against two women Shad Begum, an activist in Dir, and me, 
Malala.  The 
Taliban were dressed in black and carried Kalashnikovs.  We had only gone a short way when a policeman stopped the van and started asking 
questions, wasting precious time.  It didnt 
even have its own building.  

Spit it out, son! hed roar whenever my father got stuck in the middle of a sentence.  

I would get very depressed and sometimes collapse seeing the problems all around us, said 
Hidayatullah, but when Ziauddin is in a crisis he becomes strong and his spirits high.  They had only announced their mission to the army chief of staff, 
General Ashfaq Kayani, and President Zardari after the event.  

We felt frustrated and scared once again.  Nowhere is it written in the Quran 
that a woman should be dependent on a man.  
Muslim Khan, the Taliban spokesman, was on the phone.  

On the way to school I sometimes saw the Taliban with their caps and long dirty hair.  The holy man was called 
Lewano Pir, Saint of the Mad, because he was said to be able to calm lunatics.  Sometimes I was very 
afraid but I said nothing, and it didnt mean I would stop going to school.  

There was also Nooria, whose mother Kharoo did some of our washing and cleaning, and Alishpa, 
one of the daughters of Khalida, the woman who helped my mother with the cooking.  But 
I think that if someone kills your brother, you shouldnt kill them or their brother, you should teach 
them instead.  When he was a child he thought this small valley 
was the entire world and that if anyone went beyond the point where either mountain kissed the sky, 
they would fall off.  I thought if anyone attacked me 
it would be on those steps.  
So when a new girl named MalkaeNoor joined our class, I didnt think anything of it.  Today it has around twenty million people.  

By the age of seven I was used to being top of my class.  Many of those killed 
were children who like me had been at school that morning.  The people who live in the FATA are all 
from Pashtun tribes like us Yousafzai, and live on both sides of the border with Afghanistan.  Dr Javid said it was like flying an aircraft you can only do it using the right 
instruments, and even if the hospital had them they werent being used properly.  
Everyone brought what they could.  

In Mardan there were already big camps of white UNHCR tents like those for Afghan refugees in 
Peshawar.  

The school continued to lose money.  

The next morning the news was good.  Most of the 
time they hid their faces.  One night the Taliban held what we call a flag march near our street and patrolled the roads 
with guns and sticks as if they were the army.  Or the day our kindergarten teacher Miss Ulfat told 
him I had written, Only Speak in Urdu, on the blackboard for my classmates at the start of an Urdu 
lesson so we would learn the language faster.  I prayed to God every night to give me strength.  With all the bad stuff going on in those days, we needed small, small reasons to laugh.  Traffic Taliban, we joked to try and 
keep our spirits up.  Moniba and I could no longer watch our favourite 
Bollywood shows like Shararat or Making Mischief .  I thought, Surely how the system works depends on the people overseeing it? The 
Taliban.  We held an election for speaker and I won! It was strange to stand up there 
on the stage and have people address me as Madam Speaker, but it felt good to have our voices heard.  This was the fear 
that filled our daily lives.  My father said later, I cant explain 
it.  It was wonderful to hear that sound and run 
through the doorway and up the steps as we used to.  I ate a little bit of it then gave it to another girl to finish.  Someone who is 
against America, against the Pakistan establishment, against English law, he has been infected by the 
Taliban.  He became a perfect talib.  Their previous home had a mud roof which leaked in the rain and we had two spare 
rooms so they stayed with us for a nominal rent and their children went to our school for free.  It was very hard.  She 
wanted to buy a new cradle for him when I was born my father couldnt afford one so they used an 
old wooden one from the neighbours which was already third or fourth hand but my father refused.  For a while her daughters also had to collect 
rubbish to survive.  Hidden among them was Abdul Aziz, disguised in 
a burqa, along with his daughter.  

I would listen rapt as he told stories of warring tribes, Pashtun leaders and saints, often through 
poems that he read in a melodious voice, crying sometimes as he read.  

By the end of 2008, around 400 schools had been destroyed by the Taliban.  

Inside Dr Afcals van my father was talking to the media, giving a running commentary on the 
exodus from the valley.  
My father says that in that moment he could not hold back his tears.  He was so 
angry that he made the daylong bus journey to Mingora to see the Swat minister of education.  

My cousin Reena came into my room They knew you were stealing, she said.  She had seen the New York Times documentary Class 
Dismissed in Swat Valley and tracked us down.  The fighting was taking place 
outside Mingora though we could still hear gunfire.  He also helped Baba with 
heavy tasks like clearing snow from the roof.  But I had no idea where 
I was.  There was 
so much damage that it cost my father 90,000 rupees to repair equivalent to the monthly fees for 
ninety students.  Shiza had laughed and said he wouldnt be able to answer so many.  Are you Malalas father? Once again my fathers heart sank.  None of the 
older women had any education but they all told stories and recited what we call tapey, Pashto 
couplets.  

This was the start of real trouble.  The school has another gate.  It felt as if my honour was at stake for five 
rupees, he told me.  Then the colonel called my father into his office, where he had 
the scans up on a screen.  This showed that my brain was swelling dangerously.  On each side of the family he had an uncle with the same affliction.  One of our neighbours told us he 
had even seen them leaving the bodies of dead Taliban in the streets for all to see.  Nurses and doctors kept coming in and out.  
It was cramped with twenty girls and three teachers.  

Finally we got through the mountain pass at Malakand and left Swat behind.  But when you banned girls 
education people spoke out.  Just as it is our right to sing.  Shes alive! she shouted.  His 
sermons at Friday prayers were so popular that people would come down from the mountains by 
donkey or on foot to hear him.  Is she your daughter? asked the colonel.  
Then a CIA agent called Raymond Davis shot and killed two men in Lahore who had approached his 
car on a motorbike.  She lived in Banr Bazaar, a narrow 
street in our town of Mingora which is famous for its dancers and musicians.  
But this was different.  On the walls were photographs of all our army 
chiefs, the most powerful men in our country including dictators like Musharraf and scary Zia.  But Fazlullahs headquarters were just a few miles away, and 
even though the Taliban were not near our house they were in the markets, in the streets and the hills.  I had no idea what New York and America were.  Even if she is injured, just let her survive.  The nurses and doctors were speaking English though they 
seemed to all be from different countries.  

In my dreams about the shooting my father is also in the bus and he is shot with me, and then there 
are men everywhere and I am searching for my father.  I knew my mother was still mourning my aunt and they had been feeling uneasy 
about me receiving so many awards, but it seemed to be about more than that.  

They took me for another CT scan.  I arrived at dawn as the last star blinked out.  Its 
all just rubble, he said.  Her own nurses from 
Birmingham were there waiting and had explained to the cardiology nurses the specific procedures 
for dealing with head injuries.  

His only precaution was to change his routine.  He needed to remove some of my skull to give the brain space to 
expand, otherwise the pressure would become unbearable.  Tennis Balls and the Buddhas of Swat 



First the taliban took our music, then our Buddhas, then our history.  I noticed my father was not very happy with this.  So when my father was 
thirteen and told my grandfather he was entering a public speaking competition he was stunned.  Sometimes we covered our ears or buried our heads under 
pillows, but the guns were close by and the noise was too loud to block out.  He was relieved but baffled.  He joked to my father that if either of them had relatives 
to stay, they should pay a fine.  They told people that what was happening in Swat was not about Islam. 30 a.  

My mother was excited to be in Mingora.  

Among the visitors who came and were not allowed in was Rehman Malik, the interior minister.  But he refused to be silent.  This was 
different and very much like the holidays we read about in novels.  I could not speak, my eyes were shut and it was only my breath 
that reassured them I was still alive.  At that time 
suicide bombings were rare in Pakistan there were six in total that year and it was the biggest 
attack that had ever been carried out by Pakistani militants.  Dont 
help me, brother, as this will bring immense pleasure to Fazlullah.  

I am only human, and when I heard the guns my heart used to beat very fast.  When she was born our luck changed.  Others were asking the same thing.  .  When 
she said she wasnt interested he turned his attention back to me.  She told my father, You dont 
have to come, but I am going and I will take the children to Shangla.  Exams were due in March but how could they take place? Coming first didnt 
matter if you couldnt study at all.  Pray for Malala, he told them.  Our home is in Shangla.  The fire is reaching the valley.  The 
hospital could not cope with all the patients and had to erect big tents outside to treat people.  We had never seen our city like this.  In our society you have to take revenge for such slights, but my father was 
much smaller than his cousins.  
My mother and brothers had no passports or documentation.  After about ten 
minutes of this he realised from my facial expressions that I could understand him perfectly.  He said it felt like a wall came down in his throat.  She was then furious when she learned that my father did not get a good 
price for them.  

We couldnt see in front, but a young bearded man in lightcoloured clothes had stepped into the 
road and waved the van down.  We Pashtuns cannot turn away relatives or friends, however inconvenient.  I have no personal quarrel with the principal but 
I am telling you what Islam says.  Our teachers and my parents were there too.  

My father became suspicious.  

I had gone to bed when just before midnight the militants struck.  For as long as my father could remember it had been 
his dream to open a school, but with no family contacts or money it was extremely hard for him to 
realise this dream He thought there was nothing more important than knowledge.  Fortunately at this point 
the ruling family of the United Arab Emirates stepped in.  He 
quickly agreed it was the right thing to do, although afterwards he said, None of us ever imagined 
how much it would take over the hospital.  She was also our only political 
leader to speak out against the militants and even offered to help American troops hunt for bin Laden 
inside Pakistani borders.  

In the school my father told the people, I saw your villagers burning these things.  

One day we found our teacher Miss Hammeda in floods of tears.  Pakistan doesnt have student loans and he had never even set foot in a bank.  But Sher Zaman did not go to college and ended up becoming a 
dispenser in the village pharmacy.  They were waiting 
for you to come clean but you just kept on.  

Shortly afterwards the mufti went to the woman who owned the school premises and said, 
Ziauddin is running a haram school in your building and bringing shame on the mohalla 
[neighbourhood].  

Fazlullah himself was still at large.  I found it particularly hard in the 
afternoon, when I didnt want to be dragged away from the TV At exam time I prayed to Allah for 
high marks though our teachers used to warn us, God wont give you marks if you dont work hard.  To try and boost 
their income they ran a tuck shop at school, going off in the mornings and buying snacks to sell to the 
children.  

Not everyone was happy about the deal.  When Irfan and a 
cameraman arrived in Mingora, our uncle, who was staying with us, said over and over that it was too 
risky to have cameras in our house.  He had asked the doctors to brief him on their progress before flying home, 
which happened to be the morning after I had been shot.  Sometimes their roadblocks were less than a 
kilometre apart on the same main roads.  My mother was worried about telling him he had a daughter 
not a son, but he says he looked into my eyes and was delighted.  Archaeologists say it was almost as important as 
the Buddhas of Bamiyan, which the Afghan Taliban blew up.  She rushed home and told my grandmother, who was staying with us at the time.  The wait felt endless.  We drank green tea as we could not afford milk for regular tea.  

The mufti started to object but my father had had enough.  When the TV news began to show the devastation 
we saw that entire villages had been turned to dust.  Everyone complained about the drone attacks 
which were happening in the FATA almost every week.  

Our army had never before gone into the FATA.  cant 
detect US helicopters but gets cable TV just fine, said another.  
Then MMA activists launched attacks on cinemas and tore down billboards with pictures of women 
or blacked them out with paint.  Right from the first session I think Shiza was surprised how strongwilled and 
vocal we all were.  You take one or two minutes to utter just one sentence.  It felt sacred to us.  She thought I would think it strange that she hadnt come to me, 
but people told her not to go as I was either dead or about to be moved.  He said we should continue to 
speak out.  It was clear the 
superintendent wanted money.  I have had such dreams since the launch 
of the military operation in Swat.  It cant be repaid with expressions like thank 
you.  

After my school closed down I continued to write the blog.  Then they captured 
the airport and in a week they had taken back the city.  The more interviews I gave, the stronger I felt and the more 
support we received.  Money poured in from all over the Arab 
world, particularly Saudi Arabia, which matched whatever the US sent, and volunteer fighters too, 
including a Saudi millionaire called Osama bin Laden.  Nawaz 
Sharif was so worried about his reaction that he tried to stop the plane from landing in Pakistan.  This will not last, my father predicted.  Many did, and they set off, armed with old rifles or just axes and 
bazookas.  Two other wives and his eleven children lived below them.  It was a bitterly cold night in January but 150 people gathered.  Dr Farooq was an Islamic scholar and former member of the JamaateIslami party, 



and as one of the biggest voices against Talibanisation he had even issued a fatwa against suicide 
attacks.  For us in Swat this was very 
close to home.  He and Hidayatullah hardly had money to pay for food, let 
alone bribes.  

After that my father entered every competition in the district.  Even the woodpeckers.  .  

No, I have to do this, said Nawab Ali.  At least I didnt have to wear one.  I could 
see in his eyes that I had failed him I wanted him to be proud of me, like he was when I was 
presented with the first inyear trophies at school.  We used the Pakistani rupee, but the government of Pakistan could only intervene on 
foreign policy.  My father and 
I went to Peshawar and visited lots of places to tell people what was happening.  Theyre just like our politicians they talk the talk but they wont do anything, Id 
said.  

We like conspiracy theories in Pakistan and we had many.  

We always went to the village for the Eid holidays.  How could they stop more than 50,000 girls from going to school in the twenty first 
century? I kept hoping something would happen and the schools would remain open.  We 
must get her to hospital.  Then we remembered General Abbas and his visiting card.  A man came near my 
mother and she took her shoe off and hit him once then twice and he ran away.  I was on the way back to critical care after 
another CT scan, and flitted between consciousness and sleep until I woke properly.  Fazlullah closed beauty parlours and banned shaving so 
there was no work for barbers.  I was speaking to them but no one could hear me because of 
the tube in my neck.  The Taliban were using hotels and 
government buildings as bunkers.  She could speak confidently in front of hundreds of people and they would hang on her 
every word.  

Over a hundred soldiers had been killed in the military operation and 900 injured, and they wanted 
to show themselves as heroes.  A few days later they attacked an army convoy travelling in 
the direction of Swat and killed thirteen soldiers.  
Around three and a half million people had lost their homes.  

In some ways the army did not seem very different to the militants.  The last few shops as we headed north out of Mingora 
were wooden shacks that seemed to lean on each other, in front of which were piles of reconditioned 
tyres for the bad roads ahead.  Benazirs bus was blown up in a 
wave of orange flame.  Girls like me who still went to school he 
called buffaloes and sheep.  Individual Americans also offered to help, including Senator John 
Kerry, a rich man who had visited Pakistan many times, and Gabrielle GifTords, a congresswoman 
who had been shot in the head while meeting constituents at a shopping mall in Arizona.  Thats what they did in Waziristan when they went after kidnappers and bandits.  We have a saying, Without honour, the world counts for 
nothing We fight and feud among ourselves so much that our word for cousin tarbur is the same 
as our word for enemy.  My father had taken down the Khushal School sign and left it in the courtyard.  She began praying with the Holy Quran in her hand, standing facing the wall, 
reciting verses over and over for hours.  He was recognised by the British as the head of state in 1926 and 
installed as wali, which is our word for ruler.  Then three top surgeons from the 
province came to examine me.  My parents had 
not held one for me because they could not afford the goat and rice needed to feed the guests, and my 
grandfather would not help them out because I was not a boy.  But tragically she had died that January of a heart attack following an epileptic fit.  My father kept trying to persuade Naeem s friends and family to stay so 
he could be fined too! 

After three months Naeem had had enough.  They were forcing men to grow beards as long 
as a lantern and women to wear burqas.  

There was worse in store when my father went to register the school.  Her dream was to be a fashion designer 



although she knew her family would never agree to it, so she told everyone she wanted to be a doctor.  I slept with my mother and father in one 
room and the other was for guests.  

Mr Khan, my father said to him, you know what happened to the people of Afghanistan.  But unlike in other years no 



date was announced for the start of next term.  My mother, father, grandmother, my cousins wife and baby and my 
brothers all squashed into the back of Dr Afzals van along with his wife and children.  Every channel was showing footage of me with a commentary of prayers and moving poems as if I 
had died.  Some even agreed with her killing, out of fear of the Taliban or because they were in favour 
of them.  All the girls were singing and chatting and our voices 
bounced around inside the bus.  

He tried to explain that those children were breadwinners so if they went to school, even for free, 
the whole family would go hungry.  That maulana has a bad eye 
onus, said my father one day.  

That is wrong! said the maulana.  

It was thrilling to see my words on the website.  We raced around, building snowmen and snow bears and trying to catch 



snowflakes.  Ms, ps and ks 
were all enemies lying in wait.  What we need to know is who imposed these militants on us, he wrote.  At the end of the pass is a greendomed 
shrine where people throw coins to give thanks for their safe arrival.  We have so many people in our country who are illiterate.  

Finally everyone was ready.  My father said 
people had been seduced by Fazlullah.  That was tough and dangerous work, and the coffins of 
those killed in accidents would come back several times a year.  Who are you? You are crazy! You 
need to go to a doctor.  The Taliban then took two police stations in 
Khwazakhela and moved on to Madyan, where more police officers gave up their weapons.  The 
Americans cut off aid.  She had been married off as soon as 
she entered puberty.  Many of the rich fled. One year ago I left my home for school and never returned.  

The mullah clearly wasnt happy as he wanted the school closed altogether.  My grandfather wrote his speeches 
and he almost always came first, gaining a reputation locally as an impressive speaker.  It was also becoming clear that while they were 
best friends, they found it hard to work as business partners.  But the pencil mark stayed stubbornly at five feet.  The pencil was never there, but I knew who I would help first.  A small boy was 
brought to sit on their laps to encourage the birth of a son.  They had ended up 
in an argument, and of course just as in our arguments at school there were different versions of who 
said what.  Please stop it! she begged in Pashto in 
between screams and whimpers as each blow was delivered.  Today Swat is part of the province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, or 
KPK, as many Pakistanis call it, but Swat used to be separate from the rest of Pakistan.  Nearby was the White 
Palace Hotel, which used to be the walis summer residence.  

There was a teacher in our school who lived just a tenminute walk from our house.  Gul Makai uses the Quran to teach her elders that war is bad and they 
eventually stop fighting and allow the lovers to unite.  
If it was anything serious they would have to make the long bus journey to Mingora unless they were 
lucky enough to know someone with a car.  My father remembers that one 
day a maulana called Sufi Mohammad came to the village and asked young men to join him to fight 
the Russians in the name of Islam.  Neither 
man could get any money from their families, and Hidayatullah was not pleased to discover that my 
father was still in debt to lots of people from college, so they were always receiving letters 
demanding money.  Before Abbottabad hed 
been in Haripur and before that hidden away in our own Swat Valley, where he met Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammad, the mastermind of 9/ 1 1 .  As far as he could see, I was medically dead.  Now their 
helicopters flew in pairs overhead like big black buzzing insects, and when we walked home we 
stayed close to the walls so they wouldnt see us.  They wanted to kill two birds with one stone.  Her husband would not take her to the beach, 
and even if she had somehow slipped out of the house, she would not have been able to follow the 
signs to the sea because she could not read.  I promised 
myself Id never do such a thing again.  On Pakistans fiftieth anniversary on 14 August 1997 there were parades and 
commemorations throughout the country.  A doctor she knew told her the bullet had 
passed through my forehead, not my brain, and that I was safe.  

Dr Javid, who was there when I was brought round, says he will never forget the look of fear and 
bewilderment on my face.  

The next morning a school worker came with milk, bread and eggs to our house for our breakfast.  Though we still had our 
television they had switched off the cable channels.  Our home 
was near Circuit House, the army headquarters, so we were worried it might have been destroyed in 
the shelling.  Our family and friends said they had thought it was the end of the world.  Why should we change our names thats what criminals do.  General Zia had promised to be in power for ninety days and had 
stayed more than eleven years until he was killed in an air crash.  Much of the road had collapsed into the river and large boulders had fallen and 
blocked the way.  

Whenever he saw me he would greet me with a song as he was still concerned about the sad 
meaning of my name and wanted to lend some happiness to it: L Malala Maiwand wala da.  

Their leader was Maulana Fazlullah, a 28yearold who used to operate the pulley chair to cross 
the Swat River and whose right leg dragged because of childhood polio.  The price of the 
gas cylinders we used to buy from the market doubled so my mother had to cook on a fire like we did 
in the village.  At the back of the house was a 
veranda where the women gathered.  Foreign aid agencies were also worried about the safety of their staff after a Taliban 
spokesperson demanded that the Pakistan government reject help from Christians and Jews.  One school gave its 
teachers salaries for a month, but most didnt know what to do as they couldnt afford to pay.  The 
meeting started with recitations from the Chapter of Victory a surah from the Quran followed by 
speeches from different leaders in the five districts of our valley Kohistan, Malakand, Shangla, 
Upper Dir and Lower Dir.  

Adam could not come to Swat because it was too dangerous for foreigners.  My 
father didnt have any money for the hospital or for a midwife so a neighbour helped at my birth.  This is my number, call me.  
Fazlullah exploited this ignorance.  Then he 
asked if he could talk to me and began asking questions using Irfan as an interpreter.  You already have lots of problems and we are doing lots for you, he replied.  

The girl was played by Moniba, of course, and another classmate Attiya played the part of my 
assistant to add some salt, pepper and masala with her witty asides.  

We lived in Mingora, the biggest town in the valley, in fact the only city.  
They hung him and then they shot his father.  He then wrote a letter to the Daily Azadi, our local 
newspaper.  Can you sell them to me for ten 
rupees? she asked.  By nightfall on 10 July, when 
the siege was finally over, around a hundred people had been killed including several soldiers and a 
number of children.  Do you hear me? she called.  So people 
wouldnt think I was getting special treatment, my father arranged for us to do papers at another 
school, that of his friend Ahmad Shah.  So everyone spoke with great authority, 
celebrating like the Prophet when he conquered Mecca, though his speech was one of forgiveness not 
cruel victory.  He promised to meet us later in Shangla.  It was as different for us as Islamabad is to New York.  Look after your own affairs.  

Then I was in class one day when my classmates said, You have won a big prize and half a 
million rupees! My father told me the government had awarded me Pakistans first ever National 
Peace Prize.  The school was 
my world and my world was the school.  
Once again I stayed up late, memorising the textbook about the history of our independence.  She was always out helping people.  It must be 
Malala! they said.  Every morning I would stand against it to check 
if I had grown.  My grandmother said, Benazir will 
become shaheed, meaning she would die an honourable death.  He was made 
general secretary of the Pakhtoon Students Federation (PSF), which wanted equal rights for Pashtuns.  My Malala, my Malala, my mother wailed and Maryam joined her.  Unlike Moniba, 
who has straight hair, mine is wavy, and I liked to twist it into curls or tie it into plaits.  

This is typical, he said.  In their bubble inside the hospital they did not realise that my story had travelled all round the 
world and that people were calling for me to be sent abroad for treatment.  The 
nations prayers are with you and your daughter, he told my father.  

My father kept insisting to everyone in a few days we will return.  

Still, it was with a heavy heart that we returned to Swat.  

Almonds are good, he said.  Go and ask the manager of the White Palace Hotel and 
he will tell you what these girls did .  Zahid Khan 
was bleeding so much it was as if his white beard was bathed in red.  At first stealing gave 
me a thrill, but that did not last long.  Our friend Shiza and some of the activists we had met in Islamabad came to 
Mingora and distributed lots of money.  

I wasnt scared but I had started making sure the gate was locked at night and asking God what 
happens when you die.  A while later we heard that 
she had two children.  So he called my cousin to take him.  I knew he would not take my demands seriously so 
I didnt push very hard.  The terrorists even blew up the ski lift and the big hotel in Malam 
Jabba where tourists used to stay.  It is huge and white and looks like a shimmering tent suspended between 
minarets.  Even in summer its frosted with snow.  The main road to 
our village from Alpuri, the capital of Shangla, had been washed away, and entire villages were 
submerged.  She really wanted to please her parents, particularly her mother.  Zahid Khan was a hotel owner and had a big 
hujra.  It was exam time so school 
started at nine instead of eight, which was good as I dont like getting up and can sleep through the 
crows of the cocks and the prayer calls of the muezzin.  
Suddenly the school owners were in a position of power.  

Moniba, Ayesha and I also started learning about journalism from a British organisation called the 
Institute for War and Peace Reporting, which ran a project called Open Minds Pakistan.  I began to think that maybe I should go to Peshawar or abroad or maybe I could ask our 
teachers to form a secret school in our home, as some Afghans had done during Taliban rule.  

Around the same time as our Taliban were emerging in Swat, the girls of the Red Mosque madrasa 
began terrorising the streets of Islamabad. m.  

It is our tradition for the bride to receive furniture or perhaps a fridge from her family and some 
gold from the grooms family.  Hello, 
BhabiV I called.  

My father called my cousin Khanjee to find out how widely the letters had been distributed.  Then vice versa.  Each khan kept hundreds of armed men both for 
feuds and to raid and loot other villages.  Time 
to get up, Jani muri, he would say.  I am sorry but I cant help you.  

It was in one of Yaseem s newspapers that my father read for the first time some of the incredible 
international reaction to my shooting.  Yet these 
innocent men were being held while the Taliban leaders went free.  He recognised the number as the Khushal 
School and passed the phone to his friend Ahmad Shah to answer.  

The other girls were screaming and crying.  I am president of the 
Global Peace Council, the spokesperson of the council of elders, the president of the Swat 
Association of Private Schools, director of my school and head of my family.  But 
first we need to educate our girls so they can become teachers! 

One day Sufi Mohammad proclaimed from jail that there should be no education for women even at 
girls madrasas.  He was right.  All the private schools were in the same boat.  She told me her name was Rehanna and she was the Muslim chaplain.  Often he would weep as he spoke of 
his love for Islam Usually he spoke for a while, then his deputy Shah Douran came on air, a man who 
used to sell snacks from a tricycle in the bazaar.  The most popular part of his show came every evening when he would read 
out peoples names.  So far we had driven in the opposite direction, but we had had to take the only lift we could 
get out of Swat.  

We have a custom called swara by which a girl can be given to another tribe to resolve a feud.  

When he got to the hospital only one other member of the jirga committee was there.  If there was any left she fed it to the birds.  It would be better to plead, OK, 
shoot me, but first listen to me.  A peace deal had been struck between the Taliban and the 
provincial government, which was now under the control of the ANP, not the mullahs.  I thought, One day I will be a politician and do these things myself.  We Pashtuns see this as an auspicious sign.  I guess he ended up 
somewhere in the middle.  Look at my dark skin and look at yours ! 

We visited the White Palace and saw where the Queen had slept and the gardens of beautiful 
flowers.  

Someone gave me a copy of The Alchemist by Paulo Coelho, a fable about a shepherd boy who 
travels to the Pyramids in search of treasure when all the time its at home.  In Pakistan we have something called the 
Blasphemy Law, which protects the Holy Quran from desecration.  He 
called back with bad news they had been left everywhere, though most shopkeepers had ignored 
them and thrown them away.  Respected Ambassador, I request you, please help us girls to get an education, I said.  The doctor put a hand on his shoulder and 
reassured my father that I would be taken care of and he could trust him.  They did not realise people from Islamabad or even Peshawar would think me very 
backward.  The Americans 
said he had been tipped off and escaped.  We just 
knew my father didnt want us there, said my father.  In the winter 
when parents didnt want their children to stay outside in the snow they would tell the story about the 
lion or tiger which must always make the first step in the snow.  When my father first brought his 
wife to school, all the teachers referred to her as my brothers wife or Bhabi.  

It was a brave decision by Colonel Junaid, whose superiors were not convinced and were being 
told by other people that I should be sent abroad.  Then they disappeared off to Islamabad if they were elected to the National 
Assembly, or Peshawar for the Provincial Assembly, and wed hear no more of them or their 
promises.  The helipad was only a mile away, a fiveminute drive, 
but he was scared the whole way.  

The first paper, on Monday, 8 October, was physics.  

Hai Kakar told me it could be dangerous to use my real name and gave me the pseudonym Gul 
Makai, which means cornflower and is the name of the heroine in a Pashtun folk story.  If we advertise we wont be able to watch it.  Were she to 



break that tradition, men and women would talk against her, particularly those in our own family.  He used his 
station to encourage people to adopt good habits and abandon practices he said were bad.  

We came home from school late that day.  His voice did not boom like his fathers, but his 
passion shone through and as he went on he gained confidence.  When my grandparents came home they were furious and beat him.  

In the hostel my parents waited.  



My father had had enough.  

That afternoon, when my father came home from school, I told him about the scavenger children 
and begged him to go with me to look.  When my father went to the police they 
showed him a file on me.  The nurses 
.  
Sometimes a plywood coffin would be brought back from one of the mines.  All the other girls in my class wanted to be 
doctors, but I decided I wanted to be an inventor and make an antiTaliban machine which would sniff 
them out and destroy their guns.  Environmentalists had warned that our mountains had been stripped of 
trees by the Taliban and timber smugglers.  

The mufti on Khushal Street was a member of Tablighi Jamaat, a Deobandi group that holds a huge 
rally every year at its headquarters in Raiwind, near Lahore, attended by millions of people.  

The army was in shock.  I had become interested in journalism after seeing how my 
own words could make a difference and also from watching the Ugly Betty DVDs about life at an 
American magazine.  

Driving from the airport to the hostel, I was amazed by the number of people and houses and cars.  Everyone was in a 
continuous state of anxiety.  But when they 
came round in October 2012 I felt under pressure.  Many ISI officers were close to its leaders, having known them for years, and 
shared some of their beliefs.  The drops sparkled in the sun.  But the 
Russians ended up stuck in Afghanistan for ten years, through most of the 1980s, and when he became 
a teenager my father decided he too wanted to be a jihadi.  

It took over half an hour to walk to school, and because I am bad at getting up in the morning the 



second day we were late.  At first we thought we were safe 
in Mingora, the biggest town in Swat.  It was my grandmothers 
faith in my father that gave him the courage to find his own proud path he could travel along.  Dont do that, 
Maryam said.  My father and brothers were standing outside when a group of 
teenage Taliban went past playing victory songs on their mobiles.  Even those who had 
defended Fazlullah at the start, believing his men were the real standardbearers of Islam, and given 
him their gold, began to turn against him My father told me about a woman who had donated 
generously to the Taliban while her husband was working abroad.  In Swat the doctors had told him this was something simple, now 
it seemed very serious.  

At home I started bolting the main gate of our house at night.  

The general replied in a very military way.  Our founder Jinnah wanted the rights of 
Muslims in India to be recognised, but the majority of people in India were Hindu.  After neurosurgery it is essential to monitor breathing and gas exchange, and C02 
levels are supposed to be kept in the normal range.  The women could not get 
information; they didnt know if their husbands and sons were dead or alive.  One theory was that the devastation had been 
created by the Americans using something called HAARP (High Frequency Active Auroral Research 
Program) technology, which causes huge waves under the ocean, thus flooding our land.  Before we had even started, 



intelligence agents came and asked, What are you doing? Who brought these outfits? 

On 12 July I turned fourteen, which in Islam means you are an adult.  Afterwards people told him his name 
was heard on Mullah FM in a threat from Shah Douran.  In my grandfathers Friday addresses he would talk about the poor and the 
landowners and how true Islam is against feudalism.  The roof overlooked the stage so some 
media had set up their cameras there.  There we met up 
with my cousin Khanjee, who was heading north like us.  

I just want to know if my husband is dead or not, pleaded one lady I met.  We went on our first ever visit to the theatre to see an English play called Tom, Dick and 
Harry and had art classes.  
You run the haram school, he said.  He used to climb up electricity poles to hang banners advertising the school, even though 
he was so afraid of heights that when he got to the top of the ladder his feet shook.  We couldnt play cricket in the street or on the roof like we used 
to.  
The Taliban have never come for a small girl.  We Pashtuns are a religionloving people, she said.  My two grandfathers did not get on.  

That morning had begun like any other, though a little later than usual.  It can be taken by killing any male member of the attackers 
family.  We 
had to climb onto a huge boulder in a field, and even then we rarely had more than one bar of 
reception so we hardly ever spoke to him But after we had been in Shangla for about six weeks, my 
father said we could travel to Peshawar, where he had been staying in one room with three friends.  

We usually stayed in Barkana at my grandfathers house, where my father grew up.  Hardly any 
women from these areas can read.  
To motivate students in all provinces he was giving cash awards to girls and boys who scored well in 
their exams.  We needed peace whoever brought it.  Even my father forgot, he was so busy hopping about.  He was not a good speaker.  

We went to shops where I bought school books and Adam bought me DVDs of American TV 
programmes like Ugly Betty, which was about a girl with big braces and a big heart.  At one point we were stopped by the army, who told us we could go no further 
and must turn back.  He used his wifes phone to protect us as he said his own phone 
was bugged by the intelligence services.  It was the first time the army had launched an operation against its own people outside 
the FATA.  

But some aid did get in.  Then we would put makeup 
on her face that wed taken from our mothers, dip her hands in hot limestone and soda to make them 
white, and paint her nails red with henna.  They were also tired of the 
endless bloodshed.  Sometimes when I 
walked along the main road I saw chalked messages on the sides of buildings, contact us for jihad 
training, they would say, listing a phone number to call.  They muttered about hidden hands and unseen forces.  
In January 2007 a close friend of one of my fathers friends was kidnapped in his village by eighty 
masked gunmen.  Our aunts scared us with ghost stories, like the one about Shalgwatay, 
the twenty fingered man, who they warned would sleep in our beds.  My grandfather never bought him new books.  Our men think earning money and ordering around others is where power lies.  

Near us on our street there was a family with a girl my age called Safina and two boys similar in age 
to my brothers, Babar and Basit.  Inside the HQ we saw offices 
with banks of televisions, men monitoring every channel, and one officer showed my father a thick 
file of cuttings which contained every mention of the army in that days papers.  She had said I was salvageable 1 
had had the right surgery at the right time but my chances of recovery were now being compromised 
by the aftercare.  On some 
mosques they set up speakers connected to radios so his broadcasts could be heard by everyone in the 
village and in the fields.  

I wanted to cry because I felt in my heart I might never see my home again.  We ran outside and they 
threw toffees and tennis balls down to us, which we rushed to catch.  I didnt mind not going to the 
Cheena Bazaar.  I loved that book and read 
it over and over again.  Usually its a 
complete confusion of Flying Coaches and rickshaws, but now it was completely deserted.  Few spoke out.  We timed our prayers by the shadow on the mountains.  There was a beautiful fifteenyearold girl called Seema.  He spoke to me in Urdu.  But fear is very powerful 
and in the end it was this fear that had made people turn against Shabana.  They warned people to stop listening to music, 
watching movies and dancing.  Four days after the ban on girls 
schools, five more were destroyed.  If shed died I would have killed Pakistans 
Mother Teresa.  People later said that some of this money had been diverted to finance a plot 
to bomb planes travelling from Britain to the US.  He was said to be more moderate than his soninlaw Fazlullah, and there was hope that he 
would make a peace deal with the government to impose sharia law in Swat and release us from 
Taliban violence.  In the winter everything was white snow, long icicles hanging from the roof like daggers, 
which we loved to snap off.  

The school had expanded a lot by then and had three buildings the original one in Landikas was a 
primary school, and then there was a high school for girls on Yahya Street and one for boys with a big 
garden of roses near the remains of the Buddhist temple.  As the tremors 
continued they had spent the entire day outdoors and then the night too, huddling together for warmth, 
even though it was bitterly cold in the mountains.  But then Maryam noticed me trying to wipe my mouth with my 
scarf.  There was outrage round the world and all the talk shows covered 
the case.  

The helipad was just a mile from our house and all the women rushed up to the roof.  I was so cross with 
myself I almost cried.  Everything was silent, pindrop silent.  The hospital was 
only five minutes away.  But the elders were 
happy with this compromise and they left.  The gunfire was in celebration.  Swat would be Swat just with a different justice system I wanted to believe this but I 
was worried.  I also knew from watching my own mother that Pashtun 
women are very powerful and strong.  She said it needed to be 
checked all the time and asked a nurse why there was no arterial line.  He also thought armed guards would 
alarm the parents of the students at school, and he didnt want to put others at risk.  Your school bus has been fired 
on, he whispered urgently to my father.  All we could see was a little stamp of open sky out of the back and 
glimpses of the sun, at that time of day a yellow orb floating in the dust that streamed over everything.  Everyone wanted to see the back of the corrupt government officials sent into the valley.  



I wrote a lot about school as that was at the centre of our lives.  Khushal had a toy helicopter and Atal a pistol 
made of paper, and one would shout, Fire! and the other, Take position I didnt care.  It was Honesty is the best policy.  He took off his turban and put it in my fathers lap.  My father tells me even before I could talk I would 
toddle into classes and talk as if I was a teacher.  My father said the doctor 
was a charlatan and this was why we needed to keep struggling against ignorance.  

My father seemed worried and shooed us into the other room, but the house was small so we could 
hear every word.  When he got the job he gave his age 
as much younger than my grandfather.  

My father consoled me by telling me about the mistakes great heroes made when they were 
children.  

One day my brothers were not home and my mother had asked me to throw away some potato peel 
and eggshells.  To this day I still havent got to try duck pancakes! 

Islamabad was totally different to Swat.  He 
had been shot several times and his throat partly slit.  Will she survive what do you think? 

In medicine two plus two does not always make four, replied Colonel Junaid.  There was no sound from the river or the wind; even 
the birds were not chirping.  She was beautiful and spoke in an 
animated way.  But when would that be? we continually asked ourselves.  I wanted to talk to the children but I was too scared.  
The most important jobs in the army, bureaucracy and government are all taken by Punjabis because 
they come from the biggest and most powerful province.  
Then Safmas father put his foot on the pedal and away we drove out of the small world of our street, 
home and school and into the unknown.  

My father said the radio station was the talk of the staffroom.  Thats how we think of each other.  We 
havent done anything wrong.  Soon our prisons were full of cases like that of a thirteenyearold 
girl who was raped and become pregnant and was then sent to prison for adultery because she 
couldnt produce four male witnesses to prove it was a crime.  The two brothers and one of bin Laden s grownup sons had 
also been killed, but bin Ladens wives and other children had been tied up and left behind and were 
then taken into Pakistani custody.  One day I want to cross 
this sea, I said.  Three Bullets 



Sir de pa lowara tega kegda 

Praday watan de paki nishta balakhtona 

O Wayfarer! Rest your head on the stony cobblestone 
It is a foreign land not the city of your kings! 



16 

The Valley of Sorrows 



It all seemed like a bad dream.  

He laughed.  They assumed their passports and visas were being processed and 
they would join me in a few days.  My mother was worried about me, but the Taliban had never come for a girl and I was more 
concerned they would target my father as he was always speaking out against them His close friend 
and fellow campaigner Zahid Khan had been shot in the face in August on his way to prayers and I 
knew everyone was telling my father, Take care, youll be next.  My father was angry.  He told me that Mahatma Gandhi said, Freedom is not worth having if it does not include 
the freedom to make mistakes.  The 
BBC even made a recording of it using another girls voice, and I began to see that the pen and the 
words that come from it can be much more powerful than machine guns, tanks or helicopters.  

Though we had no generator at home, my father bought one to install at the school, and fresh water 
was pumped from a borehole, which all the children in the neighbourhood went to collect.  She became a good friend of mine 
and of Monibas, which sometimes caused fights as three is a tricky number.  She looked like I imagined Shashaka, the dirty woman they told us about in tales in the village 
to make us wash.  There are two powers 
in the world; one is the sword and the other is the pen.  
They appeared in groups, armed with knives and Kalashnikovs, and first emerged in Upper Swat, in 
the hilly areas of Matta.  We saw 
the Red Mosque where the siege had taken place, the wide, wide Constitution Avenue leading to the 
whitecolonnaded buildings of the Parliament House and the Presidency, where Zardari now lived.  

I had the run of the school as my playground.  My mind transports 
me back to my school and there I am reunited with my friends and teachers.  
Since weve come back from being IDPs we havent seen any attacks on army and police.  The back 
where we sat had no windows, just thick plastic sheeting at the sides which flapped and was too 
yellowed and dusty to see through.  In order to protect womens purdah, men in 
families hosting the refugees even slept away from their own homes.  I 
had chosen Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Benazir Bhutto and President Barack Obama.  We said OK, if thats what you want, as long as we can live our lives.  Then Haroon went away to army cadet college.  There were 
lots of firsts although I had to miss a meal in a Chinese restaurant because I was on a TV show called 
Capital Talk.  Her voice was soft and 
her words were soothing, and I drifted back to sleep.  Who is in charge here the government or Fazlullah? 

But we still believed in peace.  They were very 
involved in local politics, belonged to secular nationalist parties and were against involvement in the 
war.  These two are spreading secularism and should be killed, it said.  

My friends and I couldnt understand why it was so wrong.  My father was horrified, thinking this meant I had internal 
bleeding.  We carried 
out this attack, and anybody who speaks against us will be attacked in the same way, said Ehsanullah 
Ehsan, a spokesman for the TTR Malala has been targeted because of her pioneer role in preaching 
secularism .  
They saw Fazlullah as a kind of Robin Hood and believed that when Fazlullah took over he would 
give the khans land to the poor.  The boys school would reopen 
after the winter holidays but the loss of the girls school represented a big cut in our income.  How can a 
recording respond to live questions? 

Afterwards people congratulated me.  The women said the missing men had not collaborated with the Taliban; maybe 
they had given them a glass of water or some bread when theyd been ordered to do so.  The 
military finally lost patience and stormed the compound.  Neither place is a good place to be.  Then as evening came it fell in shadow as the sun moved up the Black 
Mountain.  If there were eggs, they would only be for the 



boys.  What about this bone? What will you do with it? 

After three months we will put it back, replied Dr Mumtaz.  And many women have no 
education at all.  When General Abbas came in we all stood up.  

When my father was offered a place for his A Levels at Jehanzeb College, which is the best further 
education institution in Swat, my grandfather refused to pay for his living expenses.  

The night before we hardly slept because we were so excited.  

Then there were more attacks.  Jinnah smoked fifty cigarettes a day.  It broadcast every night from eight to ten and again in the 
morning from seven to nine.  The other girls 
all covered their faces before emerging from the door and climbed into the back of the bus.  The 
operation took almost five hours.  Some gave their life savings, believing that this would make God happy.  
Sending in the regular army was a tough decision.  

The next day we heard that the school had been flooded.  

Dont! I dont want to get my clothes wet! I pleaded.  

Listen, Maulana, he told Fazlullah.  Our people are being killed, but this 
Ziauddin is so outspoken and hes still alive! He must be a secret agent! Actually he had been 
threatened too but hadnt told us.  

Fazlullahs group was not the only one causing havoc.  Fazlullahs men collected 
them into huge heaps on the streets and set them on fire, creating clouds of thick black smoke that 
reached high into the sky.  In high school I read some Sherlock Holmes and laughed to see that this was the same battle 
where Dr Watson was wounded before becoming partner to the great detective.  I had a thirtyyearold problem and its been resolved in one go, one man 



told my father.  After paying the rent and salaries, there was little 
money left for food.  How 
can you? Rohul Amin asked, laughing.  

The women were from Jamia Hafsa, the biggest female madrasa in our country and part of Lai 
Masjid the Red Mosque in Islamabad.  But they had 
come a long way and its hard for us as Pashtuns to refuse hospitality.  

He laughed a lot, but as a boy he had been so selfconscious about being darkskinned that he went 
to the fields to get buffalo milk to spread on his face, thinking it would make him lighter.  You could see them openly collecting contributions and recruiting men.  The local commander, General 



Iftikhar, stormed the control tower at Karachi so that Musharraf s plane could land.  Electric pylons had been smashed into pieces so we had no 
power.  

Moniba and I liked to sit near the open back so we could see out.  It blamed citizens like us for allowing the 
Taliban to control Swat.  It means we want to make decisions 
for ourselves.  

Some boys from my fathers district went off to fight in Afghanistan.  Nobody remembered.  Then Id pray to God, Bless us.  But though their sacrifice was supposed to have restored government 
control, we were still waiting for the rule of law.  I dont want you to lookback and regret not taking action 

Cutting away some of my skull sounded very drastic to my father.  He held a big meeting in Malakand, where our ancestors had fought the 
British.  

Leaving our home felt like having my heart ripped out.  The consolation this time, however, was that there was no radio to spread this message! 

While all this suffering was going on, while people were losing their loved ones, their homes and 
their livelihoods, our president, Asif Zardari, was on holiday at a chateau in France.  And my 
ankles click when I walk, which makes adults squirm.  

My grandmother was so worried about my fathers stutter that when he was still a young boy she 
took him to see a holy man.  If you are unable to do that then you should tell others 
about it, and if you cant do that you should think about how bad it is in your heart.  Our mood on the way home was the exact 
opposite of what we had felt on the way to the meeting.  

My mother was so upset when we told her that she went to bed in tears.  Some of the girls also took part, but not in public.  Even the Pakistan media, which has been so soft on you till now, is 
outraged.  My father was in the school waiting and 



when he heard the news he came running.  We need to operate now to give her a 
chance, he said.  There were live 
electric cables hanging loose and swaying in the wind.  But she had never 
been in a situation quite like this.  

A few days later the video was everywhere.  My 
father always answered the door as women must stay inside.  

My father also loved to write poetry, sometimes about love, but often on controversial themes such 
as honour killings and womens rights.  

The other principals took paying bribes for granted, but my father argued that if all the schools 
joined together they could resist.  

Maulana, you have driven me to the wall! my father said.  

It was nightfall by the time we reached Besham as many roads were blocked.  A 


At school my father organised a peace march and encouraged us to speak out against what was 
happening.  

For us girls that doorway was like a magical entrance to our own special world.  
Teach him, if you can, the wonder of books .  The party had been close to General Zia and done 
badly in the elections.  

We heard on the news that Musharraf had sent 3,000 troops into our valley to confront the Taliban.  I was reminded 
of our history lessons, in which we learned about the loot or bounty an army enjoys when a battle is 
won.  In the ones from the early days of Pakistan you 
could easily see from his thin sunken face that Jinnah was dying.  

All this happened and nobody did a thing.  Besides, he had a family to provide for.  

General Kayani was adamant that the Americans should not be involved because of the ongoing 
bad relations between the two countries after the Raymond Davis episode and the bin Laden raid as 
well as the killing of some Pakistani soldiers at a border post by a US helicopter.  But now we were living our own drama.  The 
first candidate is a beautiful girl, and he asks her very easy questions such as, How many wheels 
does a bicycle have? When she replies, Two, he says, You are so brilliant The next candidate is 
a man so Romeo asks him impossible things like, Without leaving your chair tell me the make of the 
fan in the room above us.  

Malala was a lucky girl, says Hidayatullah.  The Quran says we should seek knowledge, 
study hard and learn the mysteries of our world.  How will you accept Islam if I put a gun to your head and say Islam is the true religion? 
If they want every person in the world to be Muslim why dont they show themselves to be good 
Muslims first? 

Regularly my father would come home shaken up due to the terrible things he had witnessed and 



heard about such as policemen beheaded, their heads paraded through the town.  

A Funny Kind of Peace 

When my brothers schools reopened after the winter break, Khushal said he would rather stay at 
home like me.  They escaped through these and over the 
mountains into Kurram, another tribal agency.  He even 
sanctioned an annual pop concert on the eve of Independence Day, which was broadcast to the nation.  And Excelsior is only coeducational in the primary section 

Muslim Khan didnt answer.  

On 17 June 2004 an unmanned Predator dropped a Hellfire missile on Nek Mohammad in South 
Waziristan apparently while he was giving an interview by satellite phone.  The school where Uncle Khan dada taught 
was in the mountain village of Sewoor, about an hour and a half s climb from their house.  

He also felt he could never do enough to please my grandfather.  Once again our 
country was expelled from the Commonwealth and became an international black sheep.  They 
said the Americans always preferred dealing with dictators in Pakistan.  
Sunni comes from the Arabic for one who follows the traditions of the Prophet.  I looked at the honours board and wondered if my name would ever 
appear on it again.  It was 
wonderful that my friends wanted to share in my success.  

For most Pashtuns its a gloomy day when a daughter is born.  My father wanted us to be inspired by our 
great hero, but in a manner fit for our times with pens, not swords.  One day my father ran into his bank manager.  By contrast we Pashtuns 
are very divided, some following Imran Khan because he is Pashtun, a khan and a great cricketer, 
some Maulana Fazlur Rehman because his party JUI is Islamic, some the secular ANP because its a 
Pashtun nationalist party and some the PPP of Benazir Bhutto or the PML(N) of Nawaz Sharif.  I think I am a bit of 
a disappointment to her as I am so like my father and dont bother with clothes and jewels.  It was the first targeted killing in Swat, and people said it was because 
he had helped the army find Taliban hideouts.  We live as we have for centuries by a 
code called Pashtunwali, which obliges us to give hospitality to all guests and in which the most 
important value is nang or honour.  He was a great hero of my father for his fight against apartheid.  There was really only one subject 9/11.  And on and on it goes.  The Taliban 
took over the Emerald Mountain with its mine and began selling the beautiful stones to buy their ugly 
weapons.  They were also both frustrated as the school was very strict and 
unimaginative.  We would talk about the trips for weeks 
beforehand, then, when the day finally came, we dressed up in our best clothes and piled into buses 
along with pots of chicken and rice for a picnic.  We were lucky too that Madam Maryam was 
brave and resisted the pressure to stop working.  The walls were covered with photographs.  Thats why I dont want to greet you 

Then one of the other men spoke up.  Attiya 
used to tease me by saying, Taliban is good, army not good.  He knew if she had been alive, she would have been on his side.  We ate at restaurants and had our first visit to a McDonalds.  

All of us girls made it clear that we wanted to see the Taliban brought to justice, but we werent 
very convinced this would happen.  Now we will have the courage to speak.  

Yes, Malala, he replied.  

Soon the house was full of women.  The dates of the feasts are announced by a 
special panel of clerics who watch for the appearance of the crescent moon.  

My father went to see the building after work.  Then Moniba started splashing me again.  
We sat stunned.  We dont 
know what the doctor injected her with but she went into shock and died.  Even as 
a toddler you talked like a politician, he teased.  The army say there is peace, said my father.  

My father had resisted leaving till the end.  Leave me, for Gods sake! I am a woman, a Muslim.  The rich people 
of Pakistan came on holiday to enjoy our clean air and scenery and our Sufi festivals of music and 
dancing. 8 million population had left 
our valley.  The Quran teaches us sabar patience but often it feels that we have 
forgotten the word and think Islam means women sitting at home in purdah or wearing burqas while 
men do jihad.  My father says that in our part of the world this idea of jihad was very much 
encouraged by the CIA.  There would be bowls of chicken, rice, local spinach and spicy mutton, all cooked over the fire 
by the women, followed by plates of crunchy apples, slices of yellow cake and a big kettle of milky 
tea.  Our country had been humiliated and we wanted to 
know why.  Madam Maryam had brought her baby boy and Hannah, her twoyearold, who looked like a 
little doll but was full of mischief.  I stopped wearing my shawl over my head 
in some of the meetings, thinking I had become a modern girl.  I wondered what I would do.  Maryams family was not happy 
about this as she was still nursing her baby boy, who had recently undergone a small operation.  I kept thinking of my school bag at home 
with copies of Oliver Twist and Romeo and Juliet waiting to be read and the Ugly Betty DVDs on the 
shelf.  My father always says that heroism 
is in the Pashtun DNA.  When it suits the Taliban, women can be vocal and visible.  

Once Muslim Khan had said girls should not go to school and learn Western ways.  I wished their outrage extended to the Talibans banning of girls education.  

My father and his friends were worried and called together local elders and leaders for a peace 
conference.  We saw women in the 
streets without purdah, their heads completely uncovered.  In return he would drop corruption 
charges against her and her husband and agree to hold elections, which everyone assumed would 
result in Benazir becoming prime minister.  Ayesha told us how one day on the way 
home from Sangota she had seen a Taliban holding up the severed head of a policeman by its hair, 
blood dripping from the neck.  Then they left in 
their helicopter because it is dangerous to be in Peshawar after dark.  

Whats done is done, my father insisted.  She saw 
their men were losing, and when the flagbearer fell she lifted her white veil up high and marched 
onto the battlefield in front of the troops.  There was some argument 
until Dr Javid made it clear who had sent them.  Atal would not stop 
weeping.  Most of the army leadership learned 
about it on TV.  Mingora was expanding quickly around 175,000 
people now called it home and our oncefresh air was becoming very polluted from all the vehicles 
and cooking fires.  To represent the Taliban they had Muslim Khan, who 
wasnt in the studio.  One 
day he called my father excitedly to say hed found the ideal place.  I had read about 
Obama and admired him because as a young black man from a struggling family he had achieved his 
ambitions and dreams.  He was starting to lose hope.  A crowd had gathered but did nothing.  

In the village the day started early and even I, who liked to sleep late, woke with the sound of 
cocks crowing and the clatter of dishes as the women prepared breakfast for the men.  That day he had been covering a peace march led by Sufi Mohammad.  My mother always told me, Hide your face people are looking at 
you.  Our people see conspiracies 
behind everything, and many argued that the attack was actually carried out by Jews as an excuse for 
America to launch a war on the Muslim world.  While some papers described me as a peace icon, others carried the usual conspiracy 
theories, some bloggers even questioning if I had really been shot.  It took them a week to clear the debris.  Pashtuns are a proud 
people of many tribes split between Pakistan and Afghanistan.  

It was late in the evening of 3 August when my father received an alarming phone call from a Geo 
TV correspondent called Mehboob.  The journey usually took about five 
hours as long as the road had not been washed away by rains or landslides, and the Flying Coach left 
early in the morning.  



My father consulted my mother on everything.  

On 27 December Benazir Bhutto addressed an election rally in Liaquat Bagh, the park in 
Rawalpindi where our first prime minister, Liaquat Ali, was assassinated.  

It soon became clear that the Americans had been right in their assessment of the deal.  Her name Tor Pekai means raven tresses even though 
her hair is chestnut brown.  

One of my fathers colleagues at the school was his friend Mohammad Naeem Khan.  First a brother on one side would attack an uncle on the other.  In our Islamic studies class at school we used to write 
essays entitled How the Prophet Lived.  How dare the Taliban take away my basic right to education? I said.  First, lets read the book and then why not respond with 
our own book, he suggested.  He and his fellow activists were holding endless meetings.  Even so my father insisted on starting the day in style by singing the national anthem.  

There was one big problem.  The Taliban set up shariat courts in all districts and 
broadcast sermons from mosques calling on the local youth to join them 

Just as they had in Swat, they burned TV sets, pictures, DVDs and tapes.  

The school was founded by my father before I was born, and on the wall above us khushal 
school was painted proudly in red and white letters.  I am told it is the height of luxury with a plush double bed, sixteen firstclass seats 
and a minihospital at the back staffed with European nurses led by a German doctor.  But it seemed they were too late.  Son, may you be the star in the sky of knowledge, he used to say.  I wished I had her whitelily skin, fine features and green 
eyes, but instead had inherited the sallow complexion, wide nose and brown eyes of my father.  You think he will be happy with tea? He wants his money.  
Until then it had seemed as if the rest of Pakistan was ignoring what was happening in Swat.  Moving me a foreign minor to the Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital was not a simple exercise, and Bolger soon found himself tangled in the hoops of British and 
Pakistani bureaucracy.  As I threw the rubbish on the mountain of rotting food, I saw something 
move and I jumped.  He became determined to end the traditional rivalry between him and his cousins.  

Though I had been born in a city, I shared my fathers love of nature.  

My father prayed they would agree, but my grandfather asked them as soon as they arrived, 
exhausted after the threeday bus journey, and his soninlaw refused outright.  Sometimes I thought I heard 
footsteps behind me or imagined figures slipping into the shadows.  Few people knew where they 
were going, they just knew they had to leave.  If I 
can help support one or two chil.  She is a very traditional woman and this is our centuriesold culture.  The new girls had horrible stories.  There was 
no response from Muslim Khan because his phone interview had been prerecorded.  Blackskinned people 
are often called white and short people tall.  Ours remained a royalblue shalwar kamiz with a white 
dupatta, or headscarf, and we were advised to keep our heads covered coming in and out of school.  He went to visit the DC at his official residence and found him hosting what appeared to be a 
celebration of the Taliban takeover.  

I told the documentary makers, They cannot stop me.  He was twentyeight years old.  He had always believed that if the Taliban came for anyone, it would be for him, not me.  When we were eleven and twelve, we did them 
together, but as we turned thirteen or fourteen my friends brothers and fathers didnt allow them 
because they had entered puberty and should observe purdah and also they were afraid.  

In Swat it was safer in the town than in the remote areas and many of our family came from the 
countryside to stay with us.  You killed people, you slaughtered people, you beheaded 
people, you destroyed schools and still there was no protest in Pakistan.  The army and Taliban had fought street to street and almost every wall was 
pockmarked with bullet holes.  Here was a man who had read so many 
books, who wrote her poems she could not read, and whose ambition was to have his own school.  I will be prime minister and 
she will be my secretary.  

This family rivalry meant that my father was bullied a lot by his cousins.  My 
grandfather suggested that he might take my father in so he could go to college there.  

Late on Wednesday night two military doctors who were intensive care specialists had arrived by 
road from Islamabad.  
Their home was in Spal Bandi, a beautiful mountain village on the way to the White Palace, and my 
father describes it as a romantic and inspirational place.  His men began killing khans and 
political activists from secular and nationalist parties, especially the Awami National Party (ANP).  Our history textbooks were rewritten to describe Pakistan as a 
fortress of Islam, which made it seem as if we had existed far longer than since 1947, and 
denounced Hindus and Jews.  

What is she saying? asked my aunt as if I were talking about something impossible.  

My father was right to think this man was not going to give up mullahs had become more 
powerful figures since Zias rule and campaign of Islamisation.  In Pashto we 
love to sing tapey, twoline poems, and as she scattered the rice she would sing one: Dont kill 
doves in the garden.  People asked how we could be spending $6 billion a year on the 
military (seven times more than we were spending on education), if four American helicopters could 
just sneak in under our radar? And if they could do it, what was to stop the Indians next door? Please 
dont honk, the army is sleeping, said one text, and Secondhand Pakistani radar for sale .  
Meanwhile the authorities, like most people, did nothing.  Thats also why we rarely say thank you, manana, because we believe 
a Pashtun will never forget a good deed and is bound to reciprocate at some point, just as he will a 
bad one.  In fact, as my mother often reminds 
my father, he was not present for the actual ceremony.  These clerics said 9/11 was 
revenge on the Americans for what they had been doing to other people round the world, but they 
ignored the fact that the people in the World Trade Center were innocent and had nothing to do with 



American policy and that the Holy Quran clearly says it is wrong to kill.  

We were terribly worried about our family in Shangla, jammed between those narrow mountains.  For Gods sake be careful, he warned.  When my father refused, a bill arrived with a large fine.  People across Pakistan were glued to a 
series on primetime TV called Beyond the Call of Duty, which was supposed to consist of reallife 
stories of soldiers battling militants in Swat.  You teach girls and have a uniform that is un Islamic.  But now Im neither a widow nor a wife.  We call our village Shahpur, but really there is a necklace of three villages along the bottom 
of the valley Shahpur, the biggest; Barkana, where my father grew up; and Karshat, which is where 
my mother lived.  They had their own website and pirate FM station 
on which they broadcast, just like Fazlullah.  The visits became 
more frequent after my father and the Swat Qaumi Jirga held a meeting in our school to protest against 
army plans for the people of Mingora and our community defence committees to conduct night 
patrols.  

Women in the village hid their faces whenever they left their purdah quarters and could not meet or 
speak to men who were not their close relatives.  Were not in a position to support a family, he told my father.  

When my parents finally got back to the hostel it was with a very heavy heart.  
Two planes had flown into it.  At dusk my father and his friends 
often gathered to sit and drink tea there.  
Many people protested outside courthouses or put up posters of their missing but got nowhere.  This maulana is starting a campaign against 
you, he warned.  I was a bit nervous but I knew it was important as many people all over Pakistan 
would be listening.  Jajai replaced his late mother as the most important woman in my fathers life.  My mother cried, but my father tried to comfort her as he felt I 
was now out of danger.  Water running from every tap, hot or 
cold as you wish; lights at the flick of a switch, day and night, no need for oil lamps; ovens to cook on 
that dont need anyone to go and fetch gas cylinders from the bazaar.  Shortly after that I found the perfect way to 



try to win back the respect of my father.  Sadly those minority communities are 
often attacked.  
Vast camps of white tents sprang up mostly around Peshawar, some of which are still there today.  There are many stories that Lord Buddha himself came here because it is a 
place of such peace, and some of his ashes are said to be buried in the valley in a giant stupa.  Most had never received so much money at once.  So he went to 
the school most days and actually tried to teach the children.  I dont think that Paulo Coelho had come across the Taliban or our useless politicians.  He told me she kept a diary 
about their lives all cramped together, about how they spent their days and about her own feelings.  
The sounds in my head were not the crack, crack, crack of three bullets, but the chop, chop, chop, 
drip, drip, drip of the man severing the heads of chickens, and them dropping into the dirty street, one 
by one.  I also stopped wearing jewellery because I asked myself, What are these 
baubles which tempt me? Why should I lose my character for a few metal trinkets? But I still feel 
guilty, and to this day I say sorry to God in my prayers.  

Afterwards we went into the small museum at the back, which had displays of the special white 
bow ties Jinnah used to order from Paris, his threepiece suits tailored in London, his golf clubs and a 
special travelling box with drawers for twelve pairs of shoes including his favourite twotone 
brogues.  Dotted around were hives of bees.  The nurses werent telling me 
anything.  But now he was irritated.  

There was less foreign help than there might have been at another time.  My father came from a backward village yet through education 
and force of personality he made a good living for us and a name for himself.  

When he finally found my father, he learned that he had heard a woman crying that her husband was 
trapped in their house and he had rushed in to save him.  

We drove out of the bazaar, past the grinning red mouth signs for dentists, the carts stacked with 
wooden cages crammed with beadyeyed white chickens with scarlet beaks, and jewellery stores 
with windows full of gold wedding bangles.  I was only eleven but I looked older, and the media seemed to like hearing from 
a young girl.  It was unbelievable.  They had no clean water as the river was brown 
with wreckage and debris.  During my fathers first term at 
college national elections were held, which were won by Benazir Bhutto, daughter of the prime 
minister who had been executed when my father was a boy.  Maybe they had even shot at people through that hole.  Then he took some 
gur, dark molasses made from sugar cane, and rolled it around his mouth to moisten it with spit.  He 
went outside, shouting Ziauddin, Ziauddin! The search almost cost Hidayatullah his life.  

My father then signed an in loco parentis document making Dr Fiona my guardian for the trip to 
the UK.  He even told people how they 
should wash their private parts.  He ended by asking in a thundering voice my grandfather would have 
been proud of, Is Islam such a weak religion that it cannot tolerate a book written against it? Not my 
Islam! 



For the first few years after graduating from Jehanzeb my father worked as an English teacher in a 
wellknown private college.  It seemed like the Taliban didnt want us to do 
anything.  I thought back to the 
children working on the rubbish heap.  So they decided to set up an Englishlanguage school in Mingora, thinking that 
since Swat was a tourist destination there would be a demand for learning in English.  In it I wrote, I was getting ready for school 
one day and was about to put on my uniform when I remembered the advice of our principal, so that 
day I decided to wear my favourite pink dress.  

We heard that thousands of people had been arrested including boys as young as eight who had 
been brainwashed to train for suicide bombing missions.  I couldnt believe it.  We found that the building opposite 
the girls school had been hit by a missile but the school itself looked intact.  

One day we got a call from America, from a student at Stanford University. m.  But then I felt guilty as I knew we were lucky.  

But not immediately.  Sometimes a group of girls would go down to the river 
for a picnic with pots of rice and sherbet.  Its location outside the centre of the city 
also offered privacy.  I played Romeo as a civil servant interviewing people for a job.  His name was Malak Bakht Baidar.  How could a notorious terrorist be hiding in Pakistan and 
remain undetected for so many years? he asked.  One of our favourite things 
was going on school trips.  

Some people were happy.  I took out my books one by one and just stared at them Maths, physics, Urdu, English, 
Pashto, chemistry, biology, Islamiyat, Pakistan studies.  Any time my parents wanted to take the short walk from the hostel to the hospital they 
first had to be cleared via walkietalkie, which took at least half an hour.  There in black and white were the words the patient may die.  

That winter it snowed and we built snow bears but without much joy.  In our country, where the army has seized power so many times, people are often 
wary of the military, particularly those from Swat, where the army had taken so long to act against the 
Taliban.  If one man, Fazlullah, can destroy everything, why 
can t one girl change it? I wondered.  My father didnt 
know what to do.  Thankfully, our supreme court stopped this.  Her grandmother my 
great grandmother was widowed when her children were young, and her eldest son Janser Khan 
was locked up because of a tribal feud with another family when he was only nine.  First my father would try to rouse me.  He read the great poems of Saadi, Allama Iqbal and Rumi to my father with such 
passion and fire it was as if he was teaching the whole mosque.  Afterwards Musa Khans body was found nearby.  O God, let 
me give the rest of my life to her; I have lived enough.  He says he looked into 
my eyes after I was born and fell in love.  My brothers also wanted to take their pet chickens mine had died because I washed it in 
cold water on a winters day.  Bush and to 10 Downing Street by 
Tony Blair.  

I also wrote about the burqa.  It was a girl about my age.  Like my father Ive always been a daydreamer, and sometimes in lessons 
my mind would drift and Id imagine that on the way home a terrorist might jump out and shoot me on 
those steps.  

A few weeks later the same teacher told him that he could no longer teach girls as the maulana 
doesnt like it.  There 
was one ray of hope Benazir Bhutto was returning.  Even today, when 
most of the foreign aid agencies have gone, shattered buildings still line the roadside and people are 
still waiting for compensation from the government to build new houses, the JuD banners and helpers 
are still present.  

Those who could, stayed in the homes of local people or with family and friends.  He remembered 
how mystified he had been by the river in his village, wondering where the water came from and went 
to, until he learned about the water cycle from the rain to the sea.  Their food was brought in by two brothers who also lived in the 



compound with their wives.  They were both away when, ten days later, there 
was a second flood and the building again filled with mud.  
He had an old radio set my uncle still has, on which he loved to listen to the news.  Ten members of Monibas family were there and 
were either killed or injured.  

I had amassed a lot of money by the end of that year half a million rupees each from the prime 
minister, the chief minister of Punjab, the chief minister of our state Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the 
Sindh government.  On the night of 7 October 2008 we heard a series of faraway blasts.  He introduced himself as an Islamic reformer and an 
interpreter of the Quran.  Dr Javid suggested 
Great Ormond Street in London, and specialist hospitals in Edinburgh and Glasgow.  

Dont worry replied my father.  All across northwestern Pakistan different 
militant groups had emerged led by people from various tribal groups.  People would visit to pray 
for spiritual guidance, cures for their ailments and even happy marriages for their children.  They borrowed 30,000 rupees 
more to repaint the building, rented a shack across the road to live in and went from door to door 
trying to find students.  On 12 July which I remember 
because it was my birthday Fazlullah gave a radio address that was quite different to his previous 
ones.  
There was no other college in Shangla, and if he didnt go to college, he would never be able to move 



out of the village and realise his dream.  First I thought it 
was a joke.  We had 
to borrow clothes from our relatives as we hadnt brought much.  My fathers friends had arrived with news that was hard to 
believe.  The monthly school 
fees were never enough to cover all our outgoings so the extra fees were welcome, but my father was 
unhappy.  One black day they even dynamited 
the face of the Jehanabad Buddha, which was carved into a hillside just half an hours drive from 
Mingora and towered twentythree feet into the sky.  Wed also heard that many homes had been looted.  An American senator said 
that the only thing missing from bin Laden s hideaway was a neon sign .  Now we must wait 

I have another stupid question, said my father.  Taking a rifle away from a Pashtun is 
like taking away his life, so he could not disarm the tribes.  We werent going to stay in the camps because it was the worst idea ever.  Others said he had been ordered to deliver this speech and been warned, If you dont, 
there are four or five suicide bombers who will blast you and everyone there.  He also liked to talk about politics.  The Americans also 
sent helicopters, which made some people suspicious.  
Anyone who sides with the government against us will die at our hands, he said.  There were 
offers too from Germany, Singapore, the UAE and Britain.  People used to say both Zahid Khan and my father were on the 
Taliban radar and both would be killed; the only thing they didnt know was which would be killed 
first.  What 
would Muslim Khan use instead of the stethoscope and the thermometer? my father asked.  They 
opened the doors of their homes, schools and mosques to the refugees.  The army was sending them to a special 
camp for jihadis to deradicalise them.  I cannot leave the area.  We Pashtuns love shoes but dont love the cobbler; we 
love our scarves and blankets but do not respect the weaver.  It was time to get back to my 
books.  It was so watery that one girl said, The sky could be 
seen in the soupy curry.  
In the town of Muzaffarabad in Azad Kashmir the JuD even set up a large field hospital with Xray 
machines, an operating theatre, a wellstocked pharmacy and a dental department.  The army had stayed in Swat and 
were everywhere in the town, yet Fazlullah still broadcast every day on the radio and throughout 
2008 the situation was even worse than before with bomb blasts and killings.  

When we landed in Peshawar, they assumed wed be taken to Lady Reading Hospital, where there 
was a very good neurosurgeon called Dr Mumtaz who had been recommended.  There 
was even a headmaster from Shangla who would boast that his greatest success was to send ten boys 
in Grade 9 for jihad training in Kashmir.  My mother is not 
easily scared and remained composed.  He 
wished us to be independent, to be tolerant, to be kind to each other.  He tried to talk to them but they ran away.  

My mother was in a state of shock and could not understand why the doctors were not operating to 
remove the bullet.  

I felt a terrible sinking feeling in my stomach.  
This was the war I was going to fight.  But 

We lived in the most beautiful place in all the world.  We also have the AhleHadith 
(people of the Hadith), who are Salafists.  Even we schoolchildren know that 
ordinary diplomats dont drive around in unmarked cars carrying Glock pistols.  He ran a boys hostel in Swat and was taking 
seven or eight boys to Kohistan by coach.  


Toffees.  But some people supported 
them because the very religious Pashtuns were angry at the American invasion of Afghanistan and the 
removal of the Taliban from power there.  I couldnt control 
myself.  The competition was always between me and my best friend Moniba, 
who had beautiful writing and presentation, which the examiners liked, but I knew I could beat her on 
content.  Her name 
means Queen of Light and she said she wanted to be Pakistans first female army chief.  They called themselves Martyrs for 
Benazir.  
Stop this or you will be in trouble and your children will weep and cry for you It was signed, 
Fedayeen of Islam.  But there was no freedom of expression, and if anyone criticised the 
wali, they could be expelled from the valley.  The news at first was muddled and she initially believed Id been in an accident and had 
injured my foot.  Even my 
grandfather was proud.  People 
often call Swat the Switzerland of the East we even had Pakistans first ski resort.  Some of us spoke out against what was happening in our valley.  He laughed at the idea.  It was around 1 1 p.  She chatted with me for a while then with my father.  

It wasnt the first time.  All his 
books were inscribed with other boys names, never his own.  My 
fathers close friend Wahid Zamans brother and brotherinlaw were among the many who went to 
Afghanistan.  He was a Pashtun like us, and when my 
father asked if he was from Islamabad he replied, Do you think Islamabad can ever belong to us 
Pashtuns? He said he came from Mohmand, one of the tribal areas, but had to flee because of a 
military operation.  When girls disappeared it was not 
always because they had been married off.  Muslims 
widely considered it blasphemous and it provoked so much outrage that it seemed people were 
talking of little else.  Moniba was devastated and the whole town was in shock.  I sometimes had nightmares, but 
at least his radio broadcasts had stopped.  We knew this would not be the end, but my father 
argued that if we had shariat the Taliban would have nothing more to fight for.  I remembered how frightening the earthquake had been.  
Everyone knew she was in love with a boy, and sometimes he would pass by and she would look at 
him from under her long dark lashes, which all the girls envied.  Why are you like this? 
I asked.  

As soon as we landed in Rawalpindi we were taken by ambulance with another military escort to a 
hospital called the Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology.  There were pictures of me 
everywhere receiving the awards she had disapproved of.  A stage was set 
up near Fazlullahs centre, and after going to hear him give Friday prayers, hundreds of people 
gathered to watch the floggings, shouting Allahu akbarl  God is great! with each lash.  Chop, chop, chop.  

The colour drained from my fathers face.  So Madam Maryam and I wrote an email to General Abbas explaining the situation.  

The colonel then said, Lets go to the hospital as there are other documents to sign.  I read books and I had a 
different accent and used slang expressions from Mingora.  

The next day he went on a live show on the Voice of America and angrily condemned the attacks.  

In March I stopped writing my blog as Hai Kakar thought there was not much more to say.  He didnt want to go alone 
with the officials and insisted my mother come too.  It was a peculiar 
system called wesh under which every five or ten years all the families would swap villages and 
redistribute the land of the new village among the men so that everyone had the chance to work on 
good as well as bad land.  We dumped our backpacks in our rooms then gathered for morning assembly under the 
sky, our backs to the mountains as we stood to attention.  One of the fruit pickers reported her to the local imam, who informed the police.  All that 
remained of the chickens was a pile of feathers and the bones of their small bodies entangled as if 
they had died in an embrace.  The letter had been buried on an inside page and the editor 
had published his name and the address of the school, which my father had not expected him to do.  In Pakistan we dont have a culture of honouring people while they 
are alive, only the dead, so he thought it was a bad omen.  

Our excitement did not last long.  He described Pakistans courts as unIslamic and said, I 
consider Western democracy a system imposed on us by the infidels.  

The army still had their guns trained on the mountains overlooking Mingora.  It was strange to think that Bangladesh was once part of Pakistan 
despite being a thousand miles away.  
Hidayatullah was furious.  Inside I was lying on a trolley, a bandage 
over my head, my eyes closed, my hair spread out.  Yet, he brought with him a vast family tree of our clan, the Dalokhel Yousafzai, going right 
back to my great great grandfather and showing only the male line.  Each of these strands has many different subgroups.  We knew many victims of feuds.  I was sitting on the left between Moniba and a 
girl from the year below called Shazia Ramzan, holding our exam folders to our chests and our school 
bags under our feet.  My grandfather and uncle used to drive my father mad, 
teasing him, Youre not as good as Sher Zaman, so much he once wished that rocks would come 
down the mountain and flatten him.  Every day his fellow activists came to the shack or the school for lunch.  Almonds are very costly.  Tell me how can one 
live without daughters, he sobbed.  One of them, Rida, was excellent at making speeches.  I had developed something 
called disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), which meant my blood was not clotting, my 
blood pressure was very low and my blood acid had risen.  My mother is very devout, and to start with she liked Fazlullah.  

So I studied hard too.  Her hair was matted and her skin was covered in 
sores.  The new partners 
again went from door to door, telling people they had started a new kind of school.  

No one could understand how this had happened.  

Our street could not be reached by car, so coming home I would get off the bus on the road below 
by the stream and go through a barred iron gate and up a flight of steps.  

Then we went into the classrooms.  The highest mountain of all is the 
pyramid shaped Mount Elum To us its a sacred mountain and so high that it always wears a 
necklace of fleecy clouds.  My father also designed a shield with a famous quote from Khattak in 
Pashto: I girt my sword in the name of Afghan honour.  Many of my friends had left the valley so they could be educated in Peshawar, but my father 
insisted we would not leave.  

This wasnt just happening in Swat.  He was an 
extremely disciplined man and could not understand why they were not the same.  When I was in the street it felt as though every 
man I passed might be a talib.  .  People thought that he was a good interpreter of the Holy Quran and admired his 
charisma.  It was a journey of just five minutes 
along the stinky stream, past the giant billboard for Dr Humayuns Hair Transplant Institute where we 
joked that one of our bald male teachers must have gone when he suddenly started to sprout hair.  The same will happen to 
us, mark my words, and we will have no shelter, no place to migrate to.  They told us, Sisters, you are bringing 

shame.  The attack seemed to send the message that the CIA could do as it pleased in our 
country.  She teases him a lot and gives him advice about 
who she thinks is a genuine friend and who is not, and my father says she is always right.  Our own street was on a hill so we were a bit better protected from the overflowing river, but 
we shivered at the sound of it, a growling, heavybreathing dragon devouring everything in its path.  So British India was 
divided in August 1947, and an independent Muslim state was born.  

Earthquake victims praised the activists who had trudged up and down mountains and through 
shattered valleys carrying medical help to remote regions no one else had bothered with.  Even my name.  He appointed the first 
woman governor of the state bank and the first women airline pilots and coastguards.  Finally it landed and I was taken on board with 
my father, my cousin Khanjee, Ahmad Shah and Maryam.  
Because of his role as spokesman for the Swat Qaumi Jirga, he acted as a kind of liaison between the 
people and the army.  
He had brought with him a passport for me.  

Someone has been in here, my father said as soon as we entered the courtyard.  There were 
condolences in every mosque.  Islam does not allow democracy 
or elections.  

Islam came to our valley in the eleventh century when Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni invaded from 
Afghanistan and became our ruler, but in ancient times Swat was a Buddhist kingdom.  Look, she is responding! she said.  .  
He also met the local army colonel, who said being in college in Abbottabad would not really be any 
safer and that as long as I kept a low profile we would be OK in Swat.  
Then my mother would come.  

One day a lady called Shehla Anjum turned up at our hostel.  He was worried about how 
confused I would be.  

My mother is very beautiful and my father adored her as if she were a fragile china vase, never 
laying a hand on her, unlike many of our men.  
So he put me and my brothers Khushal and Atal, then just a baby, to bed.  It was as if I had been 
shot, he said.  My father often used to recite the poem to 
me when I was a child but I didnt know then what it meant.  We were a group of 
about seventy girls.  By Thursday morning my father was so convinced that I would 
die that he told my uncle Faiz Mohammad that the village should start preparing for my funeral.  

We continued to worry about my father.  We believe Allah listens more closely to the 
whitehaired.  
Yaseem told them he felt proud to prepare my familys food.  I had moved my arms.  It was a recipe 
for another argument between Moniba and me.  I will kill him.  Youre worried about something but youre not telling us.  

It was April 2012, the month after our exams so we were all feeling relaxed.  I told him that we wanted 
our schools rebuilt and a girls university in Swat.  

We were there one week and predictably Moniba and I quarrelled.  

I played mostly with Khushal because he was just two years younger than me, but we fought all the 
time.  Although my condition had been stabilised 
it was felt that I needed to be moved within fortyeight hours, seventytwo at the most.  

The talib talked of jihad in such glorious terms that my father was captivated.  Their first child, born in 1995, was a girl and 
stillborn.  It was always a race between us and the birds to get to them.  Instead he appeared to threaten the whole nation.  



After that my father was restless and could not enjoy Karachi.  

Then, at the end of 2008, Fazlullahs deputy Maulana Shah Dauran announced on the radio that all 
girls schools would close.  I felt so sad.  The truth will abolish fear.  Both things are false! replied my father.  

They called it Operation Silence although it was very loud.  You should be more like Malala and do other 
things, said Madam Maryam Its just as important as your education.  When Moniba spoke she couldnt control her tears.  What we knew and they didnt was that 
the mufti s own niece attended the school in secret.  I wanted to see pictures of the women in his life.  Thats why I have problems with our Pashtunwali code.  

Fazlullahs men patrolled the streets looking for offenders against his decrees just like the Taliban 
morality police we had heard about in Afghanistan.  Sir, they are saying very bad things about our school, 
they said to my father.  These would select the best students 
from private schools in the district, and one year MalkaeNoor and I got exactly the same marks.  Yet seventy per cent of Swat was under Taliban control.  How did they get there? If you have so much information, why cant 
you catch them? 

His reply went on for about ten to fifteen minutes and I couldnt work out what his answer was! 
Then I asked about reconstruction.  

As we had no relatives in Mardan we were planning to make our way to Shangla, our family 
village.  

We were not fans of the Taliban as we had heard they destroyed girls schools and blew up giant 
Buddha statues we had many Buddhas of our own that we were proud of.  But there was no clean water and people started dying from cholera.  The Sangota girls were also very bright, which meant more 
competition.  He was supposed to seal 
the peace deal with a speech calling for reconciliation and an end to violence.  As we always did, we called to each other to make sure we 
were all safe.  

His own village school had been just a small building.  Finally I would be able to return to school 
without fear.  It was hard to sleep.  

I didnt see the two young men step out into the road and bring the van to a sudden halt.  It was as if under Zia jihad had become the 
sixth pillar of our religion on top of the five we grow up to learn the belief in one God, namaz or 
prayers five times a day, giving zakat or alms, roza fasting from dawn till sunset during the month 
of Ramadan and haj, the pilgrimage to Mecca, which every ablebodied Muslim should do once in 
their lifetime.  The governor of our province issued a statement 
that anyone who wanted to fight in Afghanistan against NATO forces was free to do so.  All the men there carry weapons and hundreds of 
soldiers were killed when the locals revolted.  If they did not, he said, this would expose them for what 
they really were.  Sometimes they would get stuck and he would 
repeat the same syllable over and over like a record caught in a groove as we all waited for the next 
syllable to suddenly pop out.  I remembered the story of my father surprising 
my grandfather and longed to do the same.  The children sang for me and I was presented with a painting of me looking 
up at the sky.  I had told everyone in my class that the Taliban wouldnt go 
through with it.  If you eat them with milk just before bed it makes you brainy But I 
knew he didnt have much money and the almonds in the dish were a reminder of my guilt.  I think the Pakistan 
government is basically abdicating to the Taliban and the extremists, said Hillary Clinton, the US 
Secretary of State.  

I have a solution, said my father.  The point is we are a Taliban state.  The anger wasnt just in Pakistan.  

* 

A few months after that, in October 20 1 1 my father told me he had received an email informing him I 
was one of five nominees for the international peace prize of KidsRights, a childrens advocacy 
group based in Amsterdam.  All three brothers were killed.  
No, Jani, he replied.  Whenever my grandmother saw me speaking on television, or 
leaving the house she would pray, Please God make Malala like Benazir Bhutto but do not give her 
Benazirs short life.  

In our valley we received most of our information from the radio because so many had no TV or 
are illiterate.  When you say it five times your street will be safe, and seven times will protect 
the whole area.  

People liked to hear him talk, and I loved the evenings when guests visited.  More than three years had passed since the 
military operation to drive the Taliban out of Swat had begun.  What is going on in your school? they demanded.  

But the expression on the mans face was mocking.  Anonymous.  

I would reply, It doesnt matter; Im also looking at them, and shed get so cross.  At that moment I was very happy.  God is not a miser, she said.  Next door to us the Shah of Iran had been overthrown in a revolution a few months 
earlier so the CIA had lost their main base in the region.  This is our request to the world to save our schools, save our Pakistan, save our 
Swat 

When I got home, I cried and cried.  It seemed to us that the Taliban arrived in the night just like vampires.  He vowed to 
end corruption and go after those guilty of plundering and looting the national wealth.  If you go around with a lot of security the Taliban will use Kalashnikovs or 
suicide bombers and more people will be killed, he said.  

All through that spring and summer odd things kept happening.  People were bitterly disappointed and started abusing him What did that devil say? 
people asked.  

I wore pink to the gala and for the first time talked publicly about how we had defied the Taliban 
edict and carried on going to school secretly.  But President Bush kept praising Musharraf, 
inviting him to Washington and calling him his buddy.  Ziauddin, you have charisma; you can speak up and 
organise against them, he said.  The Pakistani newspaper 
Dawn wrote in an editorial that the deal sent a disastrous signal fight the state militarily and it will 
give you what you want and get nothing in return .  When my brothers came along and Baba 
wanted to pay, my father refused as he hadnt done this for me.  I agreed.  Seeing their grief made my mother determined to leave.  He was an impatient man at the best of times and would fly into a rage 
over the smallest thing like a hen going astray or a cup getting broken.  One girl commanded, L Assaan bash! or 
Stand at ease! and we clicked our heels and responded, Allah.  We had suffered barbaric public courts and violent justice and had lived in a constant state of 
fear.  I remembered what my father had said about taking a deep breath before starting, but then I 
saw that all eyes were on me and I rushed through.  I read a poem 
about working hard to achieve your hearts desires.  That first year they had boys and girls together, but by 
2004 the climate had changed so it was unthinkable to have girls and boys in the same class.  The soldiers had made a hole in the wall through 
which you could see the city below.  

My father was glad he didnt hear what she had told Dr Javid.  On Thursday morning one of the specialists, 
Brigadier Aslam, called Dr Fiona.  She disapproves of dancing because she says God would not like it, but she loves to decorate 
herself with pretty things, embroidered clothes and golden necklaces and bangles.  

My father argued that all he had ever wanted was to create a school in which children could learn.  

The Americans said they had no choice but to do it like that because no one really knew which side 
the ISI was on and someone might have tipped off bin Laden before they reached him.  

Then another teacher at our school, a maths teacher with long hair, also refused to teach girls.  His own father was just an ordinary soldier and 
died young, leaving him as the eldest son of eight to support his entire family.  

Its very good, he said with a knowing smile.  He was 
offered an escort by some fellow political activists but he thought that it would be too late to go if he 
waited for them.  We were wet and filthy by the time we got home.  

After a couple of rulers who did not work out, in 1917 the chiefs settled on a man called Miangul 
Abdul Wadood as their king.  They offered their private jet, which had its 
own onboard hospital.  No visitors could get in even when the Prime 
Minister came to see me he was not allowed inside.  But I had never done anything like this.  We dont understand why hes been 
attacked when they claim theres peace, he said.  

It was while he was visiting one afternoon in September 2001 that there was a great commotion 
and other people started arriving.  Half her work in the UK was 
moving critically ill children, the other half was treating them in intensive care.  My room was at the front with lots of windows and I kept the 
curtains open.  

Growing up, we children spent most of our time with our mother.  She was always very careful about 
interactions with boys because her brothers watched everything.  Are you trying to bring shame on us that we cant 
afford to buy such things? 

Its not true! I lied.  Her name was Shiza 
Shahid and she came from Islamabad.  

Its the same old story, my father said, and he was right.  So when my father announced his 
desire to ask for the hand of my mother, Tor Pekai, it was clear neither side would welcome the 
marriage.  There are men in the reception area of the school, and they see the girls enter, and this 
is very bad.  Only then did I cry.  Shortly 
after that we were told a man who had completed a peace walk from Dera Ismail Khan was coming 
through Mingora and we wanted to welcome him.  It didnt 
sound as though he had put up a fight.  
On the way he saw smoke so high it touched the clouds, the blackest smoke hed ever seen.  A few months later came the first attack on Pakistan by a US drone.  When 
the highest authority in your district joins the Taliban, then Talibanisation becomes normal.  My father 
went there after the bombings and found the buildings completely razed to the ground.  On some shelves were all the goldcoloured 
plastic cups and trophies I had won for coming first in my class.  And one of my friends, Sundus, had lost her father, who had 
been killed in an explosion.  Overlooking 
the river were tourist restaurants with big glass windows we had never been to.  I remember that inside the dyna it was hot and sticky.  At either end is a huge mountain Tor Ghar, the Black Mountain to the south, and 
Spin Ghar, the White Mountain, to the north.  It seemed to me that his every wish 
was her command.  

The authorities turned a blind eye.  

My father was bewildered by all the people gathered outside politicians, government dignitaries, 
provincial ministers who had come to show their sympathy.  My father always says, While Badshah Sahib brought peace, his son brought 
prosperity.  

In times of crisis we Pashtuns resort to the old trusted ways, so in 2008 elders in Swat created an 
assembly called the Qaumi Jirga to challenge Fazlullah.  One day, as Sher Zaman and two of his brothers were on their way to the land, 
they were ambushed by his uncle and some of his men.  Swat seemed to be under complete military control.  The city was silent and emptied of people and 
traffic as if a plague had descended.  If the school has two teachers, each 
goes in for three days and signs the other in.  There were 
children in the laps of adults and smaller children in their laps.  
Sometimes I could hardly see over the lectern.  There had been an outcry, and the Taliban spokesman Muslim Khan had 
called on the doctor to reopen it.  My name had been put forward by Archbishop Desmond Tutu from South 
Africa.  I was only 
eleven years old and already I wished it could.  They are taking salaries and have to serve 
you.  

There was a huge crowd between 30,000 and 40,000 people wearing turbans and singing 
Taliban and jihadi songs.  Then we have the Deobandi, named after 
another famous nineteenth century madrasa in Uttar Pradesh, this time in the village of Deoband.  Was I still Malala? 

My head was aching so much that even the injections they gave me couldnt stop the pain.  I was determined it would not happen 
again.  Once the 
resolutions were agreed, they were sent to officials and a handful were even acted on.  When I was little I went to the bazaar with my mother and spotted a pile of 
almonds on a cart.  He had spoken at an event to commemorate the 
third anniversary of the bombing of the Haji Baba High School.  

Our people say it is a good system, and our crime rate is much lower than in nonPashtun areas.  Why should you be 



paying bribes? You are not running brothels; you are educating children! Government officials are not 
your bosses, he reminded them; they are your servants.  For us a turban is a public 
symbol of chivalry and Pashtunness, and for a man to lose his turban is considered a great humili 
ation.  Baba also gave him a 
deep love of learning and knowledge as well as a keen awareness of peoples rights, which my father 
has passed on to me.  

Within a few months my mother was expecting.  He promised that the gas supply had been restored and that the banks were reopening, and 
called on the people of Swat to return.  I told my friends at school about the rubbishdump children and that we should help.  Pa tool 
jehan ke da khushala da, he sang.  Across 
the tribal areas people were angry and many joined militant groups or formed lashkars, local militias.  Who will reconstruct all these buildings and schools? she 
wanted to know.  They wouldnt put drops in if there was no 
chance.  

It was around the time he was praying to go to heaven as a martyr that he met my mothers brother, 
Faiz Mohammad, and started mixing with her family and going to her fathers hujra.  My father organised one of the festivals in Marghazar and invited those who had hosted the 
IDPs in the lower districts as a thank you.  They dont care if the army is actually flying the plane, they are happy to 
stay out of the cockpit and sit in business class, close the curtains and enjoy the fine food and service 
while the rest of us are squashed in economy.  Some men refused to fight, not wishing to battle their own people.  Spring was when Swat was at its greenest.  The only television was in the hujra of one of 
the wealthier families, and no one had a computer.  But they were so 
captivated by the beauty of Swat they instead decided to stay there and forced the other tribes out.  Sharif was accused of treason and only saved by his friends in the 
Saudi royal family, who arranged his exile.  And now I had.  They wanted my fathers help.  Tuition at Jehanzeb was free but my father needed money 
to live on.  

Would it have been better if we had not become independent but stayed part of India? I asked my 
father.  The tourist areas were the hardest hit parts of Swat.  I did not know how to stop.  I was overwhelmed.  General Kayani asked Dr Javid whether I should be sent abroad or not.  In the name of Allah, I am dying! 

You could hear the Taliban shouting, Hold her down.  He told us that the last part of the journey had 
been very difficult. .  

The school was not far from my home and I used to walk, but since the start of last year I had been 
going with other girls in a rickshaw and coming home by bus.  

Dear Muslim brothers 

There is a school, the Khushal School, which is run by an NGO [NGOs have a very bad reputation among religious people in our 



country so this was a way to invite peoples wrath] and is a centre of vulgarity and obscenity.  
Finally we got news from a cousin.  He appealed to all Swatis to return.  .  Then I 
would check all the rooms, one by one.  Two of his children were even born in the 
Abbottabad hospital.  

Occasionally there would be real weddings with big feasts which went on for days and left the 
family bankrupt or in debt.  Was she not a 
woman and a good woman at that? 

No, said the mullah.  My father didnt care.  He 
brought her to the hospital on the back of his motorbike, something very rare for a respectable Pashtun 
woman.  The Taliban targeted not only politicians, MPs and the police, but also 
people who were not observing purdah, wearing the wrong length of beard or the wrong kind of 
shalwar kamiz.  There was music all night long.  They told us they 
were Seraiki speakers from southern Punjab and wanted their own province.  He had written, Now you have become very popular, I still love 
you and know you love me.  In reality I went back inside.  Ban Kimoon, the 
UN Secretary General, called it a heinous and cowardly act.  
O God, please make Malala well, prayed my father.  

The militants did not give up easily.  It seemed like the whole world was outraged.  Dont worry, we 
will sort everything out, he said.  We 
were supposed to be allies and we had lost more soldiers in their War on Terror than they had.  Above the nurses station 
the clock showed it was just after 5 p.  If you do this you will get paid now and also receive a reward in 
the next world.  Now she lives in New York.  In colonial times our 
kings owed allegiance to the British but ruled their own land.  He didnt know why he was speaking to me in English.  They take out loans from state banks but they dont pay them back.  He was smiling.  He 
had joined the military as a doctor because of their superior facilities, following in the footsteps of 
his uncle, who was also an army neurosurgeon.  

How can we do that? I replied.  One of them was to a boy whose father, Sharafat Ali, had helped my father when he was a 
penniless college student.  Her own family would not take her back because it is believed that a woman who has 
left her husband has brought shame on her family.  His cousin laughed in astonishment.  In our village there was a widow called Soraya who married a 
widower from another clan which had a feud with her family.  
Danger began to creep closer.  My father was desperate not to give up the school so agreed to pay Naeem a return 
on his share of the investment.  These girls should be in purdah He told her, Take this building back from him 
and I will rent it for my madrasa.  Shabanas father said a 
group of men had knocked at her door and asked her to dance for them She went to put on her dancing 
clothes, and when she returned to dance for them, they pulled out their guns and threatened to slit her 
throat.  

It took weeks of back and forth between Washington and Islamabad, or rather army headquarters in 
Rawalpindi, before the case was finally resolved.  Yes, OK.  My mothers family home, where Uncle Faiz Mohammad lived, was still standing but 
the road it stood on had vanished.  How could he have lived so close to the 
capital just sixty miles away? And for so long! Maybe the best place to hide is in plain sight, but he 
had been living in that house since the 2005 earthquake.  Like most people in Swat we 
are from the Yousafzai tribe.  Every time we 
felt a tremor we thought it was the Day of Judgement.  



My fathers friend Ahmad Shah called it a controlled peace, not a durable peace.  A young man came in and introduced himself as Colonel Junaid, a 
neurosurgeon.  Instead of celebrating each other, our four 
provinces struggle to get along.  Dr Fiona was about to leave for the airport to fly back to Birmingham her bags were already at 
the airport but when she heard the news, she offered to help and two nurses from her hospital in 
Birmingham stayed on with her.  It was as if everyone had been waiting for 
someone else to start.  I have no militants and no FM radio, he 
joked.  

My father told the clerk to call him next time he saw the maulana.  The most visible of all was JamaatulDawa (JuD), the welfare wing of Lashkare 
Taiba.  Colonel Junaid 
ordered a third CT scan.  We had no clean water and no 
electricity.  Cases such 
as land disputes, common in our area, which used to be resolved quickly now took ten years to come 
to court.  We enjoyed peace festivals with music and dancing, unheard of under the 
Taliban.  One of them was the house of the local cleric, Maulana Khadim, which fell 
down crushing his four beautiful daughters.  

At twelve oclock Baba called us over the loudspeaker.  

Then it was Sufi Mohammads turn.  He pushed through the 
people and ran through the camera flashes into the hospital.  

We also heard that Taliban had attacked a shopkeeper because an unaccompanied woman was 
looking at the lipsticks in his beauty shop.  We dont have secrets from each other 
and we dont share our secrets with anyone else.  Then 9/11 had made this militancy more mainstream.  Its actually the largest Pashtun city in 
the world, even though its far from our lands; between five and seven million Pashtuns have gone 



there to work.  They would stop for five, ten or fifteen minutes and then start 
again the moment we drifted off to sleep.  My dream was coming true.  She had not been at 
school that day but at home nursing her baby when she received a phone call from her brotherinlaw 
checking she was safe.  It was the first time I had ever visited.  Some of the students at the two madrasas 
were from Swat.  They had collected money and organised a 
party for me with a big white cake on which was written success forever in chocolate icing.  Lets put out the flames of 
militancy before they reach here.  The swelling had gone down and my blood levels had improved.  My father told him, Dont 
accept good things from bad people.  We 
have fields of wild flowers, orchards of delicious fruit, emerald mines and rivers full of trout.  It 
was almost as if they thought Fazlullah would recreate our old princely state from the time of the 
wali.  

These were strangelooking men with long straggly hair and beards and camouflage vests over their 
shalwar kamiz, which they wore with the trousers well above the ankle.  One of them was her neighbour, 
who was angry because she said Asia Bibis goat had damaged her water trough.  
The British government had offered assistance but needed a formal request from the Pakistan 
government.  One of his friends had persuaded him to participate in a 
documentary for the New York Times website to show the world what was happening to us.  



15 

Leaving the Valley 



Leaving the valley was harder than anything I had done before.  After that they moved to another 
street and we moved into their house.  Life isnt just about taking in oxygen and giving out carbon dioxide.  Here there is any convenience you can imagine.  He set up the first telephone system and built the first 
primary school and ended the wesh system because the constant moving between villages meant no 
one could sell land or had any incentive to build better houses or plant fruit trees.  One night there was a small explosion in their village 
and the wife cried.  

Then around 3 p.  While most of us 
cant live with our wives, he couldnt be without his.  When my father tells me stories of his childhood, he always 
says that though Baba was a difficult man he gave him the most important gift the gift of education.  Education is neither Eastern nor Western, it is human.  But a few months later he 
was cleared.  On the steps outside an old man was selling popcorn.  My mother tried very hard to 
persuade him to come with us but he refused.  

It was hard to visit that place and read those speeches without thinking that Jinnah would be very 
disappointed in Pakistan.  
Write your name as Ziauddin Shaheen, he told him.  The Taliban think we are not Muslims but we are.  .  

After what happened with Safina, I vowed that I would never treat a friend badly again.  When 
the earthquake happened and our government did little to help, JuD set up relief camps patrolled by 



men with Kalashnikovs and walkietalkies.  You will not find a single 
child to drink a drop of the vaccine anywhere in Swat.  We were 
often joined by my fathers friend Zahid Khan, a fellow member of the Swat Qaumi Jirga.  We have a funny sense of humour.  Hundreds of CD and DVD shops closed voluntarily and their owners were 
paid compensation by the Taliban.  She was big for her age but was still only thirteen.  The 
teachers had already been evacuated as they had received threats earlier.  So many bodies 
had been left there that people started calling it the Bloody Square.  Within a few hours of the attack, an 
influential local cleric called Faqir Mohammad, who had run the madrasa, announced that the deaths 
would be avenged by suicide bombings against Pakistani soldiers.  He explained that 
the children would sell what they had sorted to a garbage shop for a few rupees.  

In some ways General Musharraf was very different from General Zia.  

The same one youre using, she replied.  The boys would fish using 
earthworms threaded like beads on a string hanging from a long stick.  We also heard that an army brigadier 
went to prayers led by Fazlullah.  The crowds were so large that the bus moved at a walking pace. .  

When we arrived back at school after Eid, we saw a letter taped to the gate.  

Maybe they have poor eyesight, we laughed, and cant see them.  Where did you get 
that? I asked.  

One day I saw my father and his friends watching a video on his phone.  

My fathers high school opened in 2003.  
These were no longer just about stopping people cutting down trees but were also about education 
and democracy.  A suicide bomber had struck in the basketball court at 
Haji Baba High School.  Initially Madam Maryams younger sister Ayesha agreed, but her father found out and refused 
his permission saying it was too risky.  

The other main student organisation was Islami JamaateTalaba, the student wing of the religious 
party JamaateIslami, which was powerful in many universities in Pakistan.  The 
following day a suicide bomber attacked another army truck in Swat, killing seventeen soldiers and 
thirteen civilians.  
Occasionally I made a low grunt and moved my hand or fluttered my eyes.  I needed to concentrate on winning the war.  
Thats the closing shot in one part of the documentary.  Id heard you were an infidel, he said to my father, but there 
are Qurans in your room 

Of course there are! replied my father, astonished that his faith would be questioned.  The mighty Indus River, which flows from the Himalayas 
down through KPK and Punjab to Karachi and the Arabian Sea, and of which we are so proud, had 
turned into a raging torrent and burst its banks.  My father said they were from the intelligence services.  Mullahs from the TNSM preached that the earthquake was a warning from God.  

Yes, I was just saying there is a fear in my heart, I replied.  Then the morning after, 
on TV, we would hear of more Taliban killings and wonder what the army was doing with all its 
booming cannons and why they could not even stop the daily broadcasts on Mullah FM.  But there were also text 
messages which ridiculed the army.  But also give him quiet time to ponder the eternal 
mystery of birds in the sky, bees in the sun, and the flowers on a green hillside, it says.  It was like when you pour water onto a blazing fire the flames are suddenly 
extinguished.  As a nation we have always been good at hockey, but Zia made 



our female hockey players wear baggy trousers instead of shorts, and stopped women playing some 
sports altogether.  Fazlullah denounced Pakistani government officials as 
infidels and said they were opposed to bringing in sharia law.  

Our week at the guesthouse soon ended and we went to Haripur, where one of my aunts lived.  We ran up the steps anticipating the worst.  

Then on 1 December 2009 there was a suicide attack on a wellknown local ANP politician and 
member of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa assembly, Dr Shamsher Ali Khan.  How many teachers do you have? Three! Your teachers are not trained.  Shame 
is a very terrible thing for a Pashtun man.  When the school assistants put the pans on the fire to heat up the chicken 
curry, they panicked that there was not enough food for so many girls and added water from the 
stream.  Musharraf then 
seized power and threw Sharif into a dungeon in Attack Fort.  

It took them two goes to destroy it.  Peshawar is the gateway to the FATA and since the army went into those areas in 
2004 to take on the militants, the hospital had been very busy tending wounded soldiers and victims of 
the frequent suicide bombs in and around the city.  His friend had told him it would make far more impact 
than him roaming from pillar to post.  We people of Swat were first seduced by the Taliban, then killed by 
them and now blamed for them.  My mother was very confused by all the different stories, first that my foot had been injured, 
then that I had been shot in the head.  The villagers were helpless.  
Now listen to the sound of your lockets and bangles.  

We were shocked.  As long as Fazlullah was still 
around I was afraid the Taliban would regroup and return to power.  

They named it the Khushal School after one of my fathers great heroes, Khushal Khan Khattak, the 
warrior poet from Akora just south of Swat, who tried to unify all Pashtun tribes against the Moghuls 
in the seventeenth century Near the entrance they painted a motto: we are committed to build for 
you the call of the new era.  One of the worst things about that period was when we started to 
doubt one another.  The CT scan shows the 
bullet went very close to the brain He said particles of bone had damaged the brain membrane.  

Are you scared now? I asked my father.  My brother 
Khushal was now at school in Abbottabad, so it was just me, my parents and Atal.  Some of the khans fled.  

We too were proud, but his higher profile meant we didnt see him very much.  They had no phone and no access to a 
computer to check on my progress.  It was unusual for 
women to have a special place to meet outside the home.  Please take care of my daughter.  Police fired into the 
crowd, and five people were killed.  Isnt it a miracle you all 
happened to be here when Malala was shot? said my father.  At that time my father was only twelve years old and too young to fight.  He has 
come to see you.  Even in Islamabad buildings collapsed.  To me he seemed very thin and small, like a reed that 
could snap in the wind, but he was the apple of her eye, her ladla.  Quickly, it became a rubbish mountain.  They would visit 
only once a year, and usually a new baby would arrive nine months later.  But 
she is like my second mother.  

Our words were like the eucalyptus blossoms of spring tossed away on the wind.  Notices had gone up at school for a public speaking 
competition and Moniba and I both decided to enter.  As he waited outside the headmasters office, he broke out into a 
sweat, and once inside his stutter was worse than ever.  My mother enjoyed these stories, but my father was horrified.  When her father called, my father cried.  It was shortly before the earthquake that Fazlullah had appeared in Imam 
Deri, a small village just a few miles outside Mingora on the other side of the Swat River, and set up 
his illegal radio station.  My father also kept telling them to hide the cameras.  

The mullah looked down embarrassed because greeting someone properly is important in Islam.  People had lived by the river in Swat for 3,000 
years and always seen it as our lifeline, not a threat, and our valley as a haven from the outside world.  A woman filmmaker in Islamabad got hold of it and it 
was shown on Pakistan TV over and over, and then round the world.  Some of the richer parents 
took their children out of the school when they realised they were sharing classrooms with the sons 
and daughters of people who cleaned their houses or stitched their clothes.  

We spent that first night in the home of Dr Afzal.  He believes he might even have thought of becoming a 
suicide bomber had there been such a thing in those days.  My father always said, Malala will be free as a 
bird.  

Fortunately the Taliban had disappeared.  I wasnt the only one to be interviewed.  My father returned to the village every two or three weeks to see her.  Once we got over the other side and down into the valley it seemed there were army 
checkpoints everywhere and soldiers had made nests for their machine guns on so many of the 
rooftops.  He had thought we were 
done with military dictatorships.  

When I was born we were very poor.  In the morning when my father was given 
cream or milk, his sisters were given tea with no milk.  They dont accept our 
saints and shrines many Pakistanis are also mystical people and gather at Sufi shrines to dance and 
worship.  He also swept the floors, whitewashed the walls and cleaned the 
bathrooms.  
The riverside hotels and restaurants where tourists used to eat trout and enjoy the views were all 
destroyed.  Dont support Talibanisation, its inhuman.  One of the people arrested was our old Urdu teacher who had 
refused to teach girls and had instead gone to help Fazlullahs men collect and destroy CDs and 
DVDs.  You 
speak English? he asked me.  She was diabetic and had seen a TV advert for 
a doctor in Lahore with some miracle treatment and persuaded my uncle to take her there.  She also said I must leave my school bag because there was 
so little room I was horrified.  Of course this only applied to the men; women in 
our area dont vote.  The army must do something for the future of the valley, not just 
focus on the military operation, I said.  Youre the doctor.  Pacha and his wife Jajai became his second family.  

Everyone in Swat was jubilant, but I felt the happiest because it meant school would reopen 
properly.  But the second time they will steal 
something bigger and the third something bigger still.  

Sometimes his voice was reasonable, like when adults are trying to persuade you to do something 
you dont want to, and sometimes it was scary and full of fire.  He died of tuberculosis just a year after the creation of Pakistan and we havent 
stopped fighting since.  But we 
knew that was not true.  We 
were on a school trip to Marghazar, a beautiful green valley where the air is cool, and there is a tall 
mountain and a crystalclear river where we were planning to have a picnic.  Around this time my mother also got tired of 
Fazlullah, especially when he began to preach against education and insist that those who went to 
school would also go to hell.  My father went to everybody he knew, asking for donations of 
food, clothing and money, and I helped my mother collect blankets.  Mullahs often misinterpret the 
Quran and Hadith when they teach them in our country as few people understand the original Arabic.  

Lots of buildings were surrounded by concrete blocks, and there were checkpoints for incoming 
vehicles to guard against suicide bombs.  

The ceremony was on 20 December 2011 at the prime ministers official residence, one of the big 
white mansions on the hill at the end of Constitution Avenue which I had seen on my trip to 
Islamabad.  

Yes, said my father.  Never in history have Khushal and Malala been friends.  Shazia had been hit twice, in the left collarbone and palm, and had been 
brought to the hospital with me.  The Swat museum moved its 
collection away for safekeeing.  We had been so happy, then something very bad had 
come into our lives and we were now waiting for our happy ending.  But 
Alexander was a determined and patient leader.  I was lying on Monibas lap, bleeding from my head 
and left ear.  

There seemed to be so many things about which people were fighting.  My 
parents first child was stillborn but I popped out kicking and screaming.  

I grunted.  
To avoid detection he used human couriers rather than phone calls or emails.  He called him his monkey.  So can he.  If the Taliban find out youre giving water in the month 
of Ramadan they will bomb us ! 

My father replied that people would die either of thirst or bombings.  Then in the evening, when the white peak of Spin Ghar was 
even more beautiful than in the morning, we said the makkam or evening prayers.  

At breakfast I suggested to my brothers that we should talk of peace now and not of war.  Once she was ready, the bride would start crying and we 
would stroke her hair and try to convince her not to worry.  It was run by 
two brothers, Abdul Aziz and Abdul Rashid, and had become a centre for spreading propaganda 
about bin Laden whom Abdul Rashid had met in Kandahar when visiting Mullah Omar.  Later the curfew took over our lives.  

During Eid we went to our family village as usual.  

I had done a lot of television interviews and enjoyed speaking into the microphone so much that my 
friends would tease me.  She 
thought of sleeping with a knife under her pillow.  Nearby there were boys fishing in the pile for 
metal using magnets on strings.  What kind of mullah is he? Hes driving us crazy.  He went everywhere he could demanding the reconstruction of both schools.  I used to sit in wonder, listening 
to everything they were being taught.  Let him stay and we will cover for him 

Every day it seemed a new edict came.  
While we were there we heard that Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the American envoy to Pakistan 
and Afghanistan, was holding a meeting in the Serena Hotel about the conflict, and my father and I 
managed to get inside.  People were desperately worried that the Taliban would 
take advantage of the chaos and return to the valley.  

Usually there are many ways out of Mingora, but the Taliban had cut down several huge apple trees 
and used them to block some routes so everyone was squashed onto the same road.  I was talking to Moniba, my wise, nice friend.  

That same week our maths teacher Miss Shazia arrived at school in a hysterical state.  He made bargains with God.  We even 
saw plants growing up through the cracks in the paving.  One said he had been ordered by Mullah Fazlullah 
to help build his centre in Imam Deri.  There were now 12,000 army troops in the region four 
times as many as their estimates of the Taliban along with tanks, helicopters and sophisticated 
weapons.  One of the few he 



took was from the parents of Arfa Karim, a child computer genius from Punjab with whom I had 
spoken during forums.  I thought Swat would be free of the Taliban one day and we would rejoice, but 
now I realised that might not happen.  The fruit of our apricot tree might be eaten by someone else 
this year.  There was the one about people of all 
religions being free to worship in the new Pakistan.  I like to 
mimic people, and in breaks my friends used to beg me to impersonate our teachers, particularly Sir 
Obaidullah.  The Americans claimed he was not CIA 
but an ordinary diplomat, which made everyone very suspicious.  That day Usman Bhai Jan had had enough and refused to let him.  We would cry in terror, though in 
fact as toe and finger in Pashto is the same, we were all twenty fingered, but we didnt realise.  

A nurse gave me a pencil and a pad.  I made a speech about the importance 
of education and also talked about Benazir Bhutto as this was her city.  On the way a boy on a bicycle crashed into me 
and my left shoulder hurt so much that my eyes watered.  Some of them, his friends and sympathisers, were very upset, 
but he felt that others were jealous of our high profile and believed we had got what was coming to 
us.  They looked so tasty that I couldnt resist grabbing a handful.  

Lunch was a disaster.  It was fun 
learning how to report issues properly.  No one would venture 
from their homes after sunset.  I remembered the tapa my 
grandmother used to recite: No Pashtun leaves his land of his own sweet will.  When the sun hit a certain rock, we 
used to say our asr or afternoon prayers.  If you want to 
resolve a dispute or come out from conflict, the very first thing is to speak the truth.  

At night the village was very dark with just oil lamps twinkling in houses on the hills.  What are you 
dreaming about? 

Just about crossing oceans, Aba , I replied.  Instead of Zias 
Islamisation he began what he called enlightened moderation.  I 
wanted to write my fathers phone number.  My father was alarmed how would they 
know how to deal with head wounds? But Dr Fiona assured him it had the best intensive care in 
Pakistan with stateoftheart equipment and Britishtrained doctors.  General Zia was invited to meet 
President Ronald Reagan at the White House and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher at 10 Downing 
Street.  We arranged to meet in a park, 
and I brought her Pepsi and biscuits.  
Though Afghans are renowned fighters, Colonel Imam, the officer heading the programme, 
complained that trying to organise them was like weighing frogs.  I am staying here.  Though he usually dressed in 
uniform, he occasionally wore Western suits and he called himself chief executive instead of chief 
martial law administrator.  
For many in the remote areas it was the first time they had seen a foreigner.  But there was so much water that 
the bridge across the dirty stream was submerged so we had to find another way.  My father 
told him to go ahead, and Colonel Junaid said he would bring in Dr Mumtaz to help.  We flew to 
Karachi, and it was the first time any of us had ever been on a plane.  

I had never written a diary before and didnt know how to begin.  The Americans were quick as they had thousands of troops and hundreds 
of helicopters in Afghanistan so could easily fly in supplies and show they were helping us in our 
hour of need, though some crews covered the American markings on their helicopters, fearing attack.  I was born on 12 July 1997.  My father said you couldnt really blame people 
for leaving as the government had no power.  It 
was because of Benazir that girls like me could think of speaking out and becoming politicians.  They liked his talk of bringing back Islamic law as everyone was frustrated with the 
Pakistani justice system, which had replaced ours when we were merged into the country.  

As we drove on, the landscape changed to paddy fields of deep lush green that smelt so fresh and 
orchards of apricot and fig trees.  

I had been born into a sort of democracy in which for ten years Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif 
kept replacing each other, none of their governments ever completing a term and always accusing 
each other of corruption.  People will just imagine something 
terrible went on.  AntiTaliban slogans were scrawled all over the walls.  But I was 
used to speaking in public so I came out and in front of all the boys I recited one naat, a poem in 
which I praised the Prophet.  That 
wasnt easy with a camera trained on me everywhere I went even as I brushed my teeth.  Turning to the group, he said, When this 
gentleman passes me on the street, I look to him and greet him but he doesnt answer, he just bows his 
head.  Very 



quickly the Taliban controlled most of Swat outside Mingora.  After that the boys stopped coming to our street, but one of 
the small boys who played with Atal would call out suggestively, How is Haroon? whenever I 
passed by.  My father was in tears as he gave her my passport and took her hand.  When the school opened they had just three 
students.  After that I spoke of my namesake, Malalai of Maiwand, who had 
strength and power equal to hundreds and thousands of brave men because her few lines of poetry 
changed everything so the British were defeated.  He took the tree, drew a line like a lollipop from his name and at the end of it 
he wrote, Malala.  But Baba kept complaining about the 
drain on his income and made my mothers life miserable.  Around 600 chiefs were massacred.  .  
The police found his legs and other parts of his body.  

That night my father spoke on Geo TV and told Kamran Khan that people had had high hopes but 
were disappointed.  

Our school bell rang again for the first time on 1 August.  

They are scared of the pen, he replied.  Some newspapers printed extracts.  We Yousafzai (which some people spell Yusufzai or Yousufzai) are 
originally from Kandahar and are one of the biggest Pashtun tribes, spread across Pakistan and 
Afghanistan.  So at first we thought we were in danger.  He said 
men should keep their beards but give up smoking and using the tobacco they liked to chew.  I was one of the three shortest girls in my class of thirty.  We dont 
want her to become shaheed millat [a martyr of the nation] like Liaquat Ali Khan.  The army chief was 
spending a surprising amount of his time on the issue Dr Javid says they spent six hours discussing 
me! Perhaps more than any politician he understood the political implications if I did not survive.  If we had not put guns in the hands of madrasa students at the behest of foreign powers 
we would not be facing this bloodbath in the tribal areas and Swat, he said.  She had a little money of her own so they 
used it to hire a van and she moved to Mingora.  Among them was 
Winston Churchill, who wrote a book about it, and we still call one of the peaks Churchills Picket 
even though he was not very complimentary about our people.  ISI is a huge organisation with agents everywhere.  I see my parents happy and laughing a lot.  Another was a girl in my class called Kausar, whose 
father embroidered clothes and shawls a trade our region is famous for.  Its ridiculous, my father would say, that this socalled 
scholar is spreading ignorance.  The leader of LeT is a fiery professor 
from Lahore called Hafiz Saeed, who is often on television calling on people to attack India.  

With so few students, they had little money to equip the school and soon ran out of credit.  They were little jewels without much 
meaning.  My father was always talking on his 
mobile so I loved to copy him and pretend to make calls on mine.  The village 
received no electricity from the government so many villagers got their power from these makeshift 
hydroelectric projects.  It was strange to think it was just a port of 300,000 
people when Pakistan was created.  Only the radio was allowed, and all music except for 
Taliban songs was declared haram.  My father was out a lot as he was 
busy, not just with his school, but also with literary societies and jirgas, as well as trying to save the 
environment, trying to save our valley.  

The hospital had been put on complete lockdown.  Now wait, we are coming to 
Islamabad, he shouted.  

I didnt write anything about it in my diary.  They lavished praise on him 

Prime Minister Zulfikar Bhutto had appointed Zia as his army chief because he thought he was not 
very intelligent and would not be a threat.  My father told me the news when I woke up the next morning.  

A man goes out to work, he earns a wage, he comes back home, he eats, he sleeps.  

Our Butkara ruins were a magical place to play hide and seek.  Moniba sets down rules which I try to follow.  I wrote a sketch based on Romeo 
and Juliet about corruption.  Moniba and I 
had not spoken since our fight on the last day before becoming IDPs.  That was the last time I saw him.  Malalai went to 
the battlefield with other women from the village to tend the wounded and take them water.  What they did was like our traditional jirgas the 
Americans paid blood money amounting to $2.  The man was astonished and 



apologised for having tormented him.  We would speak for half an hour or 
forty five minutes in Urdu, even though we are both Pashtun, as the blog was to appear in Urdu and he 
wanted the voice to be as authentic as possible.  

I tried to distract myself by reading Stephen Hawkings A Brief History of Time, which answered 
big questions such as how the universe began and whether time could run backwards.  Zahid Khan was returning to his 
home from a meeting with army officials at Circuit House late at night when he was ambushed.  The 
army seemed much more effective at PR than our politicians.  But my 
mother was very composed and courageous.  The next 
morning we learned that masked militants had entered the Sangota Convent School for girls and the 
Excelsior College for boys and blown them up using improvised explosive devices (IEDs).  They had been locked in a feud for so long no one 
even seemed to remember how it had started probably some small slight as we are a hotheaded 
people.  She was a poor mother of five who picked fruit for a 
living in a village in Punjab.  To my joy I found my 
school bag still packed with my books, and I gave thanks that my prayers had been answered and that 
they were safe.  

By the start of January 2009 there were only ten girls in my class when once there had been twenty 
seven.  We all call her Bhabi now.  The Americans say they gave Pakistan billions of 
dollars to help their campaign against alQaeda but we didnt see a single cent.  Where will we go? we begged.  He told people the correct 
way to do their ablutions for prayers which body part to wash first.  Manual workers made a great 
contribution to our society but received no recognition, and this is the reason so many of them joined 
the Taliban to finally achieve status and power.  He loved that painting and had hung it over his bed.  

In our culture speeches are usually written by our fathers, uncles or teachers.  

Some people obviously did not like that.  My father 
also called her and told her to prepare for the worst.  After this the road winds back down for a while then follows the 
Ghwurban River and peters out into a rocky track.  When someone takes away your pens you realise quite how 
important education is.  My brothers and I thought of digging a tunnel.  We read that more lives had been affected 
and more damage had been caused by the floods than the Asian tsunami, our 2005 earthquake, 
Hurricane Katrina and the Haiti earthquake combined.  

My father was taking a short break from the intensity of the operating theatre and was standing 
outside when a nurse approached him.  Hidayatullah laughed.  I was wheeled into a glasswalled isolation unit and a nurse 
put me on a drip.  Are you sure this is the only reason you are not 
coming? he asked.  We all ran down the steps.  The bus dropped me at 
the steps leading up to our street.  It was easy.  A woman can only remarry if her 
husband is declared dead, not missing.  Our house 
was in Gulkada, which means place of flowers, but it used to be called Butkara, or place of the 



Buddhist statues.  I had never seen them so busy before.  Another lady told me 
her son was missing.  We were told she had committed 
suicide, but we later discovered her own family had poisoned her.  I could see why, when our 
people go to Karachi to work, they always want to be buried in the cool of our valley.  He started to sleep at one of his friends 
houses to protect us in case the Taliban came for him.  Bullet casings littered the floor.  We had been away from our valley for almost three months and as 
we drove back past 

Churchills Picket, past the ancient ruins on the hill and the giant Buddhist stupa, we saw the wide 
Swat River and my father began to weep.  People visited him to 
pay homage and kiss his hand because they were tired of war and suicide bombings.  The army had destroyed his headquarters in Imam Deri and 
then claimed to have him surrounded in the mountains of Peochar.  He and his family were going so they offered us a lift.  While boys and men could roam freely about town, my mother and I could not go 
out without a male relative to accompany us, even if it was a fiveyearold boy! This was the 
tradition.  Amazingly three 
quarters of all the IDPs were put up by the people of Mar dan and the nearby town of Swabi.  

That first morning, just a few hours after my operation, there was suddenly a flurry of activity, people 
neatening their uniforms and clearing up.  Every few years Pakistan sent us a new deputy commissioner, or DC, to govern 
Swat, just as the British had done in colonial days.  Dont kill 
me! Then shots rang out and her bulletridden body was dragged to Green Chowk.  Kainat had not realised she was hurt to start with and had gone home, 
then discovered she had been grazed by a bullet at the top of her right arm so her family had brought 
her in.  When we went on school 
trips to visit the mountains, I knew she couldnt afford them so I would pay for her with my pocket 
money.  We should not kill her.  We breathed it into our lungs greedily.  They offered us 
guards but my father was reluctant.  I 
took a photo of her and vowed I would do everything in my power to help educate girls just like her.  I shouted at him so 
angrily that he stopped.  What you are doing is wrong.  And now it was all to stop.  He was from Mingora, and his body had been brought back for the funeral and a police 
salute.  In our country of course this often means the 
military.  

When he returned a few days later he was ashen.  They took money from the people who chopped down our precious trees for timber and then 
demanded more money to let their trucks pass.  When we got there the helicopter had not arrived, and we waited 
for what to him felt like hours inside the ambulance.  She is a 
wise girl, though we often fall out, particularly when we go on school trips.  

We stayed in my mothers village, Karshat, with my uncle Faiz Mohammad and his family. m when the surgeons came out.  He made Afghanistan a rallying point not only for the West, which wanted to stop the 
spread of communism from the Soviet Union, but also for Muslims from Sudan to Tajikistan, who saw 
it as a fellow Islamic country under attack from infidels.  
They were thought to be behind the terrible Mumbai massacre of 2008.  We called them chaqwartee.  Tables were 
set up for the women to hand over their wedding bangles and necklaces and women queued up to do 
so or sent their sons.  My father would buy maize and stay up late at night making and bagging popcorn.  But we always come together against outsiders who try to conquer our lands.  

My father was again busy speaking at seminars on our troubles with the Taliban.  
Fazlullah retreated into the mountains.  Sindhis often talk of separation and in Baluchistan there is an ongoing 
war which gets talked about very little because it is so remote.  Shangla is all mountain, mountain, 
mountain and just a small sky.  Sangota 



school has been there since the 1960s and never converted anyone to Christianity in fact some of 
them converted to Islam.  First they turned on a tap to wash their hands and discovered there was no water.  During Ramadan no food or 
drink can pass a Muslims lips in daylight hours.  It was 7.  I was cross.  My 
father was at the Swat Press Club for a meeting of the Association of Private Schools and had just 
gone on stage to give a speech when his mobile rang.  On the way we passed 
through Aashiqan eRasool square and were shocked to see a picture of the murderer of Governor 
Salman Taseer decorated with garlands of rose petals as though he were a saint.  It was a long journey by bus, then an hours walk up the hill to where he 
lived.  

As the Yousafzai in Swat had no ruler, there were constant feuds between the khans and even 
within their own families.  Then we played 
mango mango, where you make a circle and sing, then when the song stops everyone has to freeze.  During the Afghan 
jihad many madrasas had been built, most of them funded by Saudi money, and many young men had 
passed through them as it was free education.  

His friend Hidayatullah told him to stand firm.  

The other girls didnt agree with me.  He had one much older brother, Saeed Ramzan who I call 
Uncle Khan dada, and five sisters.  Janser Khans hujra was a 
gathering place for people to talk politics, and my father was often there, so they had got to know each 
other.  In our culture, if someone dies women come to the home of the 
deceased and the men to the hujra not just family and close friends but everyone from the 
neighbourhood.  If anyone 
offended him, their entire family could be expelled from Swat.  His family became embroiled in a dispute with their cousins over 
a small plot of forest.  But he had been lucky.  But eventually Baba gave him a fine speech, which my father 
practised and practised.  

I think everyone makes a mistake at least once in their life.  But God has also given us 
the power to forget, so that when the tragedy is over we carry on as normal.  The Taliban bulldozed both our Pashtun values and the values of Islam.  Malala is not just a good speaker but also a 
good writer.  One was Sher Zaman, a man who had been in my fathers 
class and always got better grades than him.  They were most likely killed, 
but as there is no proof of death, their wives cant be declared widows.  We were scared, but our fear was not as strong as our courage.  Because of the 
Taliban, the whole world is claiming we are terrorists.  It was simple.  As in much of our country, there were concrete 
blocks and checkpoints all around CMH to protect it from suicide bombers.  We 
have continued with our education.  The brides would wear exquisite clothes and be draped in gold, necklaces 
and bangles given by both sides of the family.  

It felt as though the whole country was going mad.  Some of our newspapers printed stories that no Jews 
went to work at the World Trade Center that day.  He built a wooden ramp from which his catapults and 
arrows could reach the top of the mountain.  I went and 
looked at my uniform, happy that I would soon be able to wear it openly.  My rivalry with MalkaeNoor continued, but after the shock of being beaten by her 
when she first joined our school, I worked hard and had managed to regain my position on the school 
honours board for first in class.  My father would get angry sometimes he 
would arrive home at lunchtime and call out, Tor Pekai, Im home! only to find she was out and 
there was no lunch for him Then he would find she was at the hospital visiting someone who was ill, 
or had gone to help a family, so he could not stay cross.  

The next evening a small group of girls emerged.  

When I woke again the next day I noticed I was in a strange green room with no windows and very 
bright lights.  They heard that offers 
were pouring in from overseas to treat me including from America, where a top hospital called Johns 
Hopkins had offered free treatment.  I close my eyes 
and for a moment I am back in my valley the high snowtopped mountains, green waving fields 
and fresh blue rivers and my heart smiles when it looks at the people of Swat.  On the way back home I noticed that he was in tears.  One of my fathers friends 
phoned her to tell her I was being taken to Peshawar by helicopter and she should come by road.  It seemed to us that these bureaucrats came to our 
province simply to get rich, then went back home.  Why did you wake me? Im not 
leaving my family.  She was pro 
West; she was speaking against the Taliban; she was calling President Obama her idol.  

Giving places to poor children didnt just mean my father lost their fees.  The night before the exams began I stayed up studying until three oclock in the morning and 
reread an entire textbook.  I spoke of the irony 
of the Taliban wanting female teachers and doctors for women yet not letting girls go to school to 
qualify for these jobs.  We learned that the first wife of the Prophet was a 
businesswoman called Khadijah.  

Now, every morning when I open my eyes, I long to see my old room full of my things, my clothes 
all over the floor and my school prizes on the shelves.  

My first diary entry appeared on 3 January 2009 under the heading I am afraid : I had a terrible 
dream last night filled with military helicopters and Taliban.  It was mentioned as the most inspiring in 
the closing speech, and some in the audience asked him to repeat whole stanzas and couplets, 
exclaiming Wah wah when a particular line pleased them, which is a bit like Bravo.  I loved it and 
dreamed of one day going to New York and working on a magazine like her.  But then they went ahead and closed our school and I felt embarrassed.  We were all horrified by the attack and 
people swore revenge.  Neither the students nor the teachers were supposed to have their own opinions, and 
the owners control was so tight they even frowned upon friendship between teachers.  I was 
in the back with my mother.  Please dont harm my children because the God you believe in is the same God 
they pray to every day.  Our friends couldnt believe it.  Ziauddin, Malalas 
brain is swelling.  People there said 
Chechens and Uzbeks were among the fighters.  There were even 
motorbikes with entire families balanced on them.  I was shot by a Taliban bullet and was 
flown out of Pakistan unconscious.  Hospitality is an important part of Pashtun culture.  They are sitting in their bunkers on top of the hills.  He was a mesmerising speaker.  One day my mother went shopping with my cousin as 
she was getting married and wanted to buy things for her wedding.  My parents say I have 
qualities of both grandfathers humorous and wise like my mothers father and vocal like my fathers 
father! Baba had grown soft and whitebearded in his old age and I loved going to visit him in the 
village.  

As we got older the village began to seem boring.  I cant leave my wife and sons alone here.  

About a week after we had returned to school, on 16 February 2009, we were woken one night by 
the sound of gunfire.  There was even a case of a man drawing a teachers pension 
when he had never taught a day in his life.  The rest of Pakistan was preoccupied with 
something else the Taliban had moved right into the heart of our nations capital, Islamabad.  Bin Laden lived on the top floor with his youngest wife, a Yemeni woman 
named Amal.  What are you doing? he would ask.  Some people are afraid of ghosts, some of spiders or snakes in 
those days we were afraid of our fellow human beings.  They 
had three children, and we liked them living with us as we all played cops and robbers on the roof.  It was such a big expanse, 
surely no one could know where it ended.  In class, when we were reciting hydrocarbon formulae during our chemistry 
lessons, I would daydream about what it would be like to stop going to school and instead start 
looking after a husband.  Meanwhile time was ticking away.  We 
didnt lead a life of luxury we Pashtuns prefer to sit on floors rather than chairs.  

Atal had been told by my mother to ride on the bus with me, so he walked over from the primary 
school.  We did not 
know then that Musharraf was also letting the Americans use our airfields.  There was no kitchen, no plumbing.  Hed say, Mr Soandso was smoking chars but has stopped because its sinful, 
or, Mr X has kept his beard and I congratulate him, or, Mr Y voluntarily closed down his CD 
shop.  Because of the curfew and the checkpoints there was not one other 
vehicle on the road that didnt belong to the military.  She didnt complain food needed to be cooked and she cooked it, and there were 
others worse off than us.  

My uncle was more dutiful.  I loved the rich soil, the 
greenness of the plants, the crops, the buffaloes and the yellow butterflies that fluttered about me as I 
walked.  

Many families live in walled compounds with watchtowers so they can keep an eye out for their 
enemies.  Just as Khattak had wanted the 
Pashtuns to unite against a foreign enemy, so we needed to unite against ignorance.  

Im confused, he told Colonel Junaid.  A few weeks later, on 8 October 2007, they tried again.  We still had little 
money and my mother checked her purse to see what she had.  
The assembly was elected for a year and we met almost every month.  I kept losing my place as the pages danced in my 
shaking hands, but as I ended with Lincolns words, I looked up at my father.  The story was that they had then planted the body in Abbottabad and faked 
the raid to embarrass Pakistan.  

Finally the goahead was given and the doctors had to face the problem of how I was to be moved 



and who would pay for it.  They had to pay a fine they could 
not afford.  

It was after the Red Mosque siege that the Swat Taliban changed.  Our favourite game was weddings.  But at the 
time it was kept a secret.  He 
was very kind and sent us 1,100,000 rupees so my father could pay everyone three months backpay.  
General Kayani was determined to change this, and the army had once again stepped in where the 
civilians had failed.  When she heard that I had been 
hurt she was having her reading lesson with Miss Ulfat and struggling to learn words like book and 
apple.  

Many of the militants in the mosque had fought in Afghanistan or Kashmir.  

At least there was no sign of the Taliban.  A few 
weeks before, we had met the American video journalist Adam Ellick in Peshawar.  It was high for Mingora, two storeys with a big water tank on the roof.  

My father was at his wits end and wept with frustration.  The militants would enter villages with megaphones and the police would flee.  

In Pakistan when women say they want independence, people think this means we dont want to 
obey our fathers, brothers or husbands.  Most of it had gone to the army; ordinary 
people received nothing.  The director of 
the CIA said Pakistan was either involved or incompetent.  My father became even more disturbed.  

To try to get people at home to support him, General Zia launched a campaign of Islamisation to 
make us a proper Muslim country with the army as the defenders of our countrys ideological as well 
as geographical frontiers.  From there they were running 
training camps and launching raids across the border on NATO troops.  The siege went on until late on 9 July, 
when the commander of the special forces outside was killed by a sniper in one of the minarets.  

My cousins made fun of me for my city ways.  But I tried to be obedient and 
polite, always saying, Yes, sir.  I completed the paper but I knew Id made a mistake filling in the blanks.  Sadly we could not see the walis room as it had been damaged by the floods.  There cannot be two 



kings in one land.  

But I said, Education is education.  I went and whispered Quranic verses over the books to try and protect 
them.  (The 
average annual income is just $250 half the Pakistani average.  They provided free 
textbooks and grants to students but held deeply intolerant views and their favourite pastime was to 
patrol universities and sabotage music concerts.  Mehboob told us that his uncle had been on his way to isha prayers, the last prayers of the day, 
at the mosque on the street near his house when he was shot in the face.  Two days later Ayatollah 
Khomeini, the supreme leader of Iran, issued a fatwa calling for Rushdies assassination.  Sir, the school you 
are running is Western and infidel, it said.  It might have 
changed the whole world but we were living right in the epicentre of everything.  

He suggested sending me to boarding school in Abbottabad like Khushal, but I didnt want to go.  Thats what he 
does.  When we entered the shop we 
were going to, the shopkeeper laughed and told us he got scared thinking we night be suicide 
bombers as many suicide bombers wore the burqa.  But two years after I was born the generals again took over.  It was a nightmare for someone trying to start a 
business and it drove Naeem to distraction.  There is a third power stronger than both, that 
of women But General Zia brought in Islamic laws which reduced a womans evidence in court to 
count for only half that of a mans.  

And me, her beauty, he laughs.  They had no power, as all their makeshift 
hydroelectric projects had been smashed to pieces.  If people volunteered in the same way to construct schools or roads 
or even clear the river of plastic wrappers, by God, Pakistan would become a paradise within a 
year, he said.  The army had wanted to imprison him, but the intelligence service had prevailed and taken him 
to Bajaur so that he could slip across the border to Afghanistan.  It was too narrow even for a cricket pitch and only 
one family had a television.  Our people dont know their exact dates of birth my mother, 
for example, does not know when she was born.  This school is a centre of vulgarity and obscenity and they take girls for picnics to different 
resorts.  I 
think it was then that Adam decided he should focus on me.  

A couple of weeks after that our school was asked to take part in the District Child Assembly 
Swat, which had been set up by the charity UNICEF and by the Khpal Kor (My Home) Foundation for 
orphans.  The 
worst moment for her was when someone came to the house with my front door keys, which had been 
found at the scene of the shooting.  We soon saw what he meant.  It was there I spent my 
twelfth birthday.  

It started to feel as though the school was not meant to be, but my father would not give up on his 
dream so easily.  Even 
some of the dancers of Banr Bazaar had moved back, although they were mostly making DVDs to sell, 



rather than performing live.  

The village was a forgotten place.  Now we are a country of 180 million and more than 96 per cent 
are Muslim We also have around two million Christians and more than two million Ahmadis, who 
say they are Muslims though our government says they are not.  I was different to the other girls as I didnt 
cover my face and I used to talk to every teacher and ask questions.  My fathers elder 
brother Saeed Ramzan had worked for years as a teacher at a local school.  She was bad, and it was right that she was killed.  Look at her, he told Adam Ellick.  Our own museum in Swat had 
closed.  There were lots of pictures on the news of 
army helicopters laden with supplies and tents, but in many of the small valleys the helicopters could 
not land and the aid packages they dropped often rolled down slopes into rivers.  Dont go 
that way, he urged.  
He began speaking against school administrators and congratulating girls by name who left school.  But my country is centuries 
behind this one.  It was an intensive care cubicle in the Queen Elizabeth Hospital.  His sisters my aunts did not go to school at all, just like 
millions of girls in my country.  I knew we were better off than those who lived in the camps, 
queuing for food and water for hours under the hot sun, but I missed my valley.  She knew he couldnt let her go 
alone.  We heard lots of civilians were being killed.  

My father used some of the money to buy me a new bed and cabinet and pay for tooth implants for 
my mother and a piece of land in Shangla.  At the top of the steps was an open courtyard with doors to all the 
classrooms.  Did you do 
anything against Islam? Did you do anything immoral? No.  The 
Afghans were so proud that the last Afghan king built a Maiwand victory monument in the centre of 
Kabul.  

Journey into the Unknown 



I was shot on a Tuesday at lunchtime.  Many children had to have their classes in tents because 
the Taliban had destroyed their schools.  One target of 



the Taliban were non governmental organisations or NGOs, which they said were antiIslam.  But we werent exactly cooperating as the ISI was still 
arming Taliban fighters and giving their leaders sanctuary in Quetta.  in the afternoon two British doctors arrived by helicopter from Rawalpindi.  Then an anonymous letter came to our house 
addressed to my father.  

We Pashtuns know the stone of revenge never decays, and when you do something wrong you will 
face the music.  They convinced themselves that the shariat in Swat would be 
different to the Afghan version we would still have our girls schools and there would be no 
morality police.  

My father longed to be eloquent with a voice that boomed out with no stammer, and he knew my 
grandfather desperately wanted him to be a doctor, but though he was a very bright student and a 
gifted poet, he was poor at maths and science and felt he was a disappointment.  When they came to our house I would bring them tea then sit quietly listening as they discussed 
what to do.  He wanted to make sure no one was pressuring him 

My wife told me, You cant leave us, my father said.  Nor would 



he leave Swat.  My father broke the seal on the wooden storage box of maize and filled their 
bowls.  I meet my best friend 
Moniba and we sit together, talking and joking as if I had never left.  If he accidentally drew a snake he 
could erase it and the snake would disappear.  We visited the Faisal Mosque at the base of the Margalla Hills, which was built by the Saudis 
for millions of rupees.  Our American allies were furious.  

A few days later I saw Safina playing with a phone exactly the same as mine.  About a week after the battle 
of Swat, forty Taliban leaders from across our province met in South Waziristan to declare war on 
Pakistan.  We had been 
getting threats all year.  

Just when it seemed matters could not get worse, the area was hit by flash floods.  Usman Bhai Jan said no, there was 
no room; she would have to stay in the back with us.  But Zia turned out to be a very 
wily man.  Millions of Afghans fled across the border and General Zia gave them refuge.  When we were IDPs I had thought about becoming a 
politician and now I knew that was the right choice.  We 
were at school when the helicopters first arrived and were very excited.  The 
senior elder was a whitebearded man of seventy four called Abdul Khan Khaliq who had been one 
of the Queens bodyguards when she had visited Swat to stay with our wali.  Moniba put it well.  Khaista, Pisho, Bhabi, Khushal, Atal! Then we heard sirens, one after another as if 
all the ambulances of Mingora were passing.  I will use it to make everyone happy As soon as I finished praying, I would check the 
drawer.  She would sit with them patiently and 
would then ask my father to explain every detail to my mother.  Teachers helped us beforehand on how to respond to 
questions.  But my father is an 
optimistic man and never deterred by practicalities.  Only later did they bring me an atlas 
so I could see it was in England.  
I loved the gloopy honey, which we ate with walnuts.  The Taliban were known to listen at peoples doors then force their way in, 
take the TVs and smash them to pieces on the street.  If you do not fall in the battle of Maiwand then, by God, someone is 
saving you as a symbol of shame.  That night 
when he went back to the army hostel, he took the passport from his pocket and gave it to my mother.  He was the guarantor that 
the Taliban would lay down their arms and there would be peace in the valley.  When he left the room Maryam switched it back 
on.  the local commander arrived and announced they were sending 
an army helicopter to take me and my father to Peshawar.  Suddenly we could 
witness these events on television.  Only my father and some journalists 
went.  It was thought this would then keep rival clans from fighting.  Only twice had I not come top both 
times when I was beaten by my class rival Malka eNoor.  Almost two 
million of us were fleeing Swat and you couldnt have fitted two million people in those camps.  He described what was happening in Afghanistan as a war 
between two elephants the US and the Soviet Union not our war, and said that we Pashtuns were 
like the grass crushed by the hooves of two fierce beasts.  They came from neighbouring villages in a remote valley 



in the upper Swat called Shangla and would see each other when my father went to his uncles house 
to study, which was next door to that of my mothers aunt.  She loved him so much that she would slip him extra meat and the cream off the milk while 
she went without.  Education is our right, I said.  All these places told our special story.  

On the last day we all had to give a speech at the Islamabad Club about our experiences in the 
valley under Taliban rule.  But finally the 
deadline was upon us.  
Our classes were still mixed at that age, and all the boys and girls yelled, Earthquake! We ran 
outside as we had been taught to do.  Now the Talibanisation is especially for us, for those like you and me 
who continue to speak out.  The army and their 
machine guns were everywhere.  Some people, like me, get caught and vow they will never do it again.  When they went in to see him he had two 
televisions on, one tuned to a local channel in Urdu and the other to Sky News in English, with news 
of my shooting.  Then all that night we heard dar dar dar, the boom of cannons and machine guns 
from the hills.  

But my father had a big problem.  
Now we had become the valley of sorrows, said my cousin Sultan Rome.  

The way bin Laden was found was like something out of the spy movies my brother Khushal likes.  Safinas mother next door had deposited her 



gold in a bank vault for safekeeping and even that had been looted.  Another little girl cried, saying she wanted to ride there too.  My father told him he had just finished school and had won a 
college place at Jehanzeb.  We visited the Lok Virsa 
museum, and it was a joy to celebrate our national heritage once again.  My father didnt attend the 
gathering.  The helicopter flight was one hour and fifteen minutes.  My father thanked him but he was very upset.  

That morning we arrived in the narrow mud lane off Haji Baba Road in our usual procession of 
brightly painted rickshaws, sputtering diesel fumes, each one crammed with five or six girls.  .  In these tough days we must be strong for 
our valley, he said.  In our house my mother managed everything because my father was so busy.  I am representing the Ulema and Tablighian and Taliban, Mullah Ghulamullah 
said, referring to not just one but two organisations of Muslim scholars to give himself gravitas.  
She spent more than a year in jail before the case went to court and she was sentenced to death.  We said it was the worst lunch ever.  From what we could see, most of them werent convinced it was safe to return.  Everything he drew became real.  Am I 
the only person who can fetch it? he wondered.  I had a 
window seat and could see the deserts and mountains of our land below me.  Dont take any more risks! 

Finally Zahid Khan was transferred to Peshawar to be operated on and my father came home.  The president of the students group in Jehanzeb College was Ihsan ulHaq 
Haqqani.  We thought speaking in English meant you were more 
intelligent.  He is lying.  She smells the threat, my mother told 
my father.  Soon mullahs all over Pakistan were 
denouncing the book, calling for it to be banned, and angry demonstrations were held.  He said they had attempted to rob him.  Khalida had 
been sold into marriage to an old man who used to beat her, and eventually she ran away with her 
three daughters.  So Hai Kakar would call me in 
the evening on my mothers mobile.  Down on the river at the Karshat end were 
water buffaloes.  Not only did our army and ISI have long links with 
some of the militants, but it also meant our troops would be fighting their own Pashtun brothers.  He gets so emotional you 
would think the events had happened just the night before, not more than 1,300 years ago.  Her brother 
had been picked up by the army, put in leg irons and tortured, and then kept in a fridge until he died.  

He drew a sketch of his attacker and said the man should be stopped before shooting anyone else.  My father was known 
in the family as Khaista dada, which means beautiful.  

In truth, lots of people in Pashtun areas live in walled compounds because of purdah and privacy, 
so the house wasnt really unusual.  I am 
representing good Muslims and we all think your girls school is haram and a blasphemy.  
Other important people will soon become victims.  There was a wall 
of screens in their office.  Their wives and children are still waiting for them I remember visiting them and feeling 
their longing.  He had given a press conference in Peshawar demanding that the 
military act against the Taliban and go after their commanders.  I thought if God wanted us to be like that He wouldnt have 
made us all different.  Its a kind of 
Romeo and Juliet story in which Gul Makai and Musa Khan meet at school and fall in love.  They cleaned and bandaged the wound.  

The Musharraf government didnt seem to know what to do.  The girl had a big sack and was sorting rubbish into piles, one for cans, one for 
bottle tops, another for glass and another for paper.  What you are doing is against our people and 
against Pakistan, he would say.  What more would it take for the army and government to resist them? 

In Washington the government of President Obama had just announced it was sending 21,000 more 
troops to Afghanistan to turn round the war against the Taliban.  A famous poem was written at that time by Rahmat Shah Sayel, the same Peshawar poet who 
wrote the poem about my namesake.  That summer, while he was 
walking in the mountains, our dictator General Zia was killed in a mysterious plane crash, which 
many people said was caused by a bomb hidden in a crate of mangoes.  The 
vehicle we were in even had to pass through an explosives check before we could head up the 
Malakand Pass.  Instead we spoke 
into a microphone in our classrooms and our voices were then projected into the main hall.  

We Pashtuns are split between Pakistan and Afghanistan and dont really recognise the border that 
the British drew more than 100 years ago.  We 
heard they were dropping hundreds of commandos from helicopters into the mountains in the north.  His teachers and friends tried to dissuade him and his father was 
reluctant to write the speech for him.  Why are we here? I thought wed go to the civil hospital.  We were disillusioned and disappointed.  They had examples like, If out 
of 10 Russian infidels, 5 are killed by one Muslim, 5 would be left or 15 bullets 10 bullets = 5 
bullets.  
Sometimes it felt as though it was all about the money.  The constant gunfire and curfews had made it impossible for the hospital to function, so he 
had moved it to Barikot.  



Is he right, Aba? I asked my father.  On Fridays the brothers would creep into the mosque and watch in 
wonder as my grandfather stood in the pulpit and preached to the congregation for an hour or so, 
waiting for the moment when his voice would rise and practically shake the rafters.  Not a single day passes without the killing of at least one Pakistani.  I noticed she had tears in her eyes.  He felt ashamed but had no choice if he didnt want to end up illiterate.  It could hardly have been a 
bloodier beginning.  The man chosen to be the leader or caliph was Abu Bakr, a close 
friend and adviser of the Prophet and the man he chose to lead prayers as he lay on his deathbed.  Soon everyone was 
weeping.  I replied, If there is a snake and a lion 
coming to attack us what would we say is good, the snake or lion? 

Our school was a haven from the horrors outside.  

When I was around four years old I asked my father, Aba, what colour are you? He replied, I 
dont know, a bit white, a bit black.  The women would not be attacked if they went to the markets, 
but the Taliban would shout at them and threaten them until they stayed at home.  We 
had seen pictures of how the army had flattened everything in an operation against militants in Bajaur 
and we thought everything we knew would be destroyed.  My mother was away and Hidayatullah needed my father to help him move 
everything up to the first floor, safe from the fastrising waters, but he couldnt find him anywhere.  

Yet my father remained hopeful and believed there would be a day when there was an end to the 
destruction.  

That evening my father received a call from the family who had been sharing our home for the last 
eighteen months.  We dont respect 
privacy and there is no such thing as making an appointment to see someone.  I was restless and kept trying to get the monitor off my finger.  Before she arrived Maryam had called to warn her, 
When you see Malala dont cry or shout.  My fathers voice is so loud my mother often jokes that he doesnt need to make phone 
calls, he can just shout.  

Some of our teachers stopped coming to school.  She might even kill you.  To begin with 
she didnt say much in class.  Can 
you help to get him off our backs? 

Im afraid I cant help you, Ziauddin, he replied.  I did not want to come second to MalkaeNoor 
again as I had in March.  The destruction 
of schools continued.  We live in a place where schools are blown up.  There were 
cigarette stubs and empty food wrappers all over the floor.  When he appeared in court even lawyers 
showered him with rose petals.  With the Taliban in the valley, our 
government could say to the Americans we cant help you because we have our own problems.  Though he and my father were great rivals, they admired each other and later became 
friends.  I also 
like the name because my real name means griefstricken.  Eucalyptus blossom blew into the house, 
coating everything white, and the wind carried the pungent smell of the rice fields.  Look at what these 
criminals are doing to pollute our beautiful valley, he always said.  She speaks 
better English than the rest of you and youre translating for her! We all laughed.  She can hear you even if you think she cant.  He is just fooling people.  

Now you can get back to school work, said Madam Maryam as we finished off the cake.  Afterwards the army 
apologised to her and said theyd been confused by his name and picked up the wrong person.  

The Russian invasion transformed Zia from an international pariah to the great defender of freedom 
in the Cold War.  One day Ahmad Shah received a warning from unknown 
people that they would kill him, so for a while he left for Islamabad to try to raise awareness there of 
what was happening to our valley.  Instead he built forts on mountains all 
across Swat and created an army.  I went with him. 6 on the 
Richter Scale and was felt as far away as Kabul and Delhi.  Then, under 
the pretext of bringing in aid, they could legitimately enter Pakistan and spy on all our secrets.  But I am pointing out that the Quran names Maryam.  My family and I sat on the rocks, 
gazing across the water, breathing in the salt tang of the Arabian Sea.  They were 
now state sanctioned terrorists.  

Most Pakistanis are Sunnis like us more than eighty per cent but within that we are again many 
groups.  They learn that there is no such thing as science or literature, that 
dinosaurs never existed and that man never went to the moon.  We went to the primary 
school where there was more space to run around and played cops and robbers.  I was already missing the green of Swat.  

After that it is all a bit hazy.  Many never came back.  

My mother is very pious and prays five times a day, though not in the mosque as that is only for the 
men.  One day Hidayatullah came back from trying to 
enrol pupils to find my father sitting in the office talking about advertising with the local head of 
Pakistan TV As soon as the man had gone, Hidayatullah burst into laughter.  Safina started it, I protested.  It was my 
mother who would wake up early in the morning, iron our school clothes, make our breakfast and 
teach us how to behave.  After his 
visit no one else was allowed at my bedside because of the risk of infection.  
Sometimes Fazlullah appeared galloping in on a black horse.  Everyone had to 
leave the district.  My own grandfather 
narrowly escaped death in the riots when his train was attacked by Hindus on his way home from 
Delhi, where he had been studying.  Atal suggested we buy them nappies! In the end 



we left them with a lot of water and corn.  I was sure it was my turn next 

We pleaded with my father not to go to the hospital as it was very late and the people who had 
attacked Zahid Khan might be waiting for him.  One night in November 2009 he had had a very narrow escape.  Finally my father was 
called forward.  
Our mountains, our trees, our flowers everything in our valley is about peace.  We were afraid that the army wouldnt know 
who we were and would shoot us.  When I saw him disappear down 
there I would cry, thinking he wouldnt come back.  LeT had close links to the ISI and was set up to liberate Kashmir, which we believe should be 
part of Pakistan not India as its population is mostly Muslim.  

Its coming here, my father warned.  

But she knew I had.  As ever, 
they ignored me and carried on with their war games.  They have already blown 
up hundreds of schools and no one has done anything.  She always says, I have four brothers, and if I do even the slightest thing wrong they can stop 
me going to school.  His name was Musa Khan Khel, and he had 
often interviewed my father.  What are you doing? I asked 
him.  After the wedding my mother moved in with my grandfather and my 
uncle.  

My parents had no idea of any of these negotiations though they knew discussions were under way 
to move me overseas.  If any of his children accidentally spilt their food he would fly into a rage.  

And it was hard to believe it was all over! More than a thousand ordinary people and police had 
been killed.  He wanted to show the human side of the catastrophe in 
Swat.  Where once we used to blame our 
old enemy India for everything, now it was the US.  This is a very peaceful building of white marble 
and somehow seemed separate from the hustle and bustle of the city.  This means cat and is her name for me.  They had to pay 
them rent in kind, usually a share of their crop.  Even today 
people talk of Mr Bhutto as a man of great charisma.  Terror had made people 
cruel.  Dont they want 
them to learn? 

Our headmistress Madam Maryam had studied at Sangota, and her younger sister Ayesha was a 
pupil there, so she and some of the other Sangota girls transferred to our school.  They thought I was modern because I came 
from town.  I am talking to the women Then hed say, Women are meant to 
fulfil their responsibilities in the home.  At that time I was unhappy with my family, but 
later I was grateful as it made me more independent.  It is a Hadith of the Holy Prophet 
that if you see something bad or evil you should stop it with your own hand.  

The bus did two trips every day, and that day we took the second one.  
More than 73,000 people had been killed and 128,000 injured, many of them permanently disabled.  Dont tell Aba, I begged.  After the PM presented 
me with the award and cheque, I presented him with a long list of demands.  Then we were on the main road built by the last wali, which follows 
the wide Swat River on the left and hugs the cliffs to the right with their emerald mines.  Again we got the same, so we both got the prize.  Chairs had been upended and the space 
was a mess.  The women would gather 
at the house of the dead mans wife or mother and a terrible wailing would start and echo round the 
valley, which made my skin crawl.  Its just I so wanted a new book, 
unmarked by another student and bought with my father s money.  We all had breakfast together me, my mother, my father, Khushal and Atal.  Then she had beaten me by not just one or two marks, the usual difference 
between us, but by five marks! I had been taking extra lessons with Sir Amjad who ran the boys 



school.  She was under Your care and You are bound to give her 
back.  He would go crying to my mother and I would go to my father.  She was nervous about going to Peshawar, 
which has become a nogo area for foreigners, but when she heard that I was a campaigner for girls 
education she was happy to help as she herself had been lucky to go to a good school and train to 
become a doctor.  It was almost unbelievable Islamabad is 
usually a quiet, orderly place, very different to the rest of our country.  So when Naeem lost his job after a dispute with the college 
administration, they decided to start their own school.  Thats how it stayed 
from then on.  Usually I liked exams as a chance to show what I could do.  
But the police did nothing to find him.  

I was confused by Fazlullahs words.  But now I had two other girls in the 
room I want space! Id cry.  So most of the pictures I found 
were of his sister Fatima.  They 
slaughter goats and eat with pleasure.  My father also saw the book as offensive to Islam 
but believes strongly in freedom of speech.  Dont worry I told her.  While we had been IDPs and for all the months the school had 
been closed he had collected no fees, but the teachers still expected to be paid.  We normally dont have monsoons in Swat and at first we were happy, thinking 
the rain would mean a good harvest.  Hidayatullah was one of the first to call.  They were strange elections as the main 
party leaders Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto were in exile.  They became known as Shias, shortened from ShiatAli, the 
Party of Ali.  He had studied in a 
British school in Peshawar, and perhaps because his own father was illiterate he was passionate 
about schools and built many, as well as hospitals and roads.  But whats happening 
is not simple, and the more you want to understand the more complex it becomes.  They were so touched by his kindness 
that they shared our story with him. m curfew and people heard her screaming, T promise Ill stop! I 
promise I wont sing and dance again.  It was complete Talibanisation humming, said my father.  You think I enter the school and take my clothes off? When you see a boy and a 
girl you see a scandal.  

To start with the only rescue workers who came were a few from a locally based foreign aid 
agency and volunteers from the TehrikeNifazeShariaeMohammadi (TNSM) or Movement for the 
Enforcement of Islamic Law, the group founded by Sufi Mohammad that had sent men to fight in 
Afghanistan.  

My father came home fuming.  I was not nervous though my father tried to 
intimidate me by saying Prime Minister Gilani came from a family of saints.  She told my father that Shazia was fine and had begged her, Look after 
Malala! 



We were taken to the helipad by ambulance under high security with motorcycle outriders and 
flashing blue lights.  Before we left, Moniba and I had an argument over something so silly I cant remember what it 
was.  But it wasnt easy to study as there was no electricity in the village in those days.  A couple of 
weeks after Shabanas murder, a teacher in Matta was killed when he refused to pull his shalwar 
above the ankle the way the Taliban wore theirs.  Our news bulletins were full of killings and death so it was natural for 
Atal to think of coffins and graves.  This is 
the path that he would later show me.  I dont remember any more.  We have no reliable electricity 
supply.  He committed every word to memory while walking in the hills, reciting it to 
the skies and birds as there was no privacy in their home.  

I asked Usman Bhai Jan to tell us a joke while we were waiting for two teachers to arrive.  I didnt want to stop learning.  



O Ziauddin! What have they done? Madam Maryam burst through the doors.  They had travelled from all over the country and many of them 
were carrying small children.  

Inside the helicopter I was vomiting blood.  Our 
people are used to being subservient because under the wali no criticism was tolerated.  Our headmistress had tried to persuade her to be a school prefect but she said she couldnt 
do anything that might distract her from her studies.  My father said this was rubbish.  Most of us had stayed with friends or family but some had 
been in the camps.  I think my 
mother would do the same for us.  The other girls stirred things up, what we call putting masala on the situation.  Near our home was a field scattered with mysterious ruins statues of lions on 
their haunches, broken columns, headless figures and, oddest of all, hundreds of stone umbrellas.  Even to enter our valley people needed official permission.  One of 
the most vocal people against me was a female MP called Dr Raheela Qazi from the religious 
JamaateIslami party.  They had nowhere to 
sleep and no clean clothes to change into.  Liberal 
progressives like him did not enjoy the singing and chanting.  

But my father didnt know that at the time and became very depressed.  Going to school, reading and doing our homework 
wasnt just a way of passing time, it was our future.  

But I thought the bullet hadnt entered her brain, said my father.  Just the day before the barber had told a journalist that the Taliban were good Muslims.  

People warned my father to leave the hospital.  Sit inside, Atal Khan, or 
I wont take you! he said.  It 
was risky but it was the only ambition I had back then.  Even so, it all seemed far, far away from our peaceful garden valley.  It was all your fault, she told me.  Look, Khaista, said my mother.  

One of their most heated debates in that first year was over a novel.  We cant disown our 
campaign! 

People were asking me to speak at events.  He opened up our media, allowing 
new private TV channels and female newsreaders, as well as showing dancing on television.  

On our short trips we forgot our troubles in Swat.  It was built in 1965 and got its name from its red walls.  My father was disappointed 
when I didnt win but I pointed out to him that all I had done was speak out; we didnt have an 
organisation doing practical things like the award winners had.  I kept seeing the dirty face of the girl from the dump and 
continued to pester my father to give them places at our school.  She told my father she felt I 
would live but he could not see how.  We heard stories that the Taliban would hear children laughing and 
burst into the room and smash the boards.  Even the Queen of England came, and stayed in the White Palace that was built from the 
same marble as the Taj Mahal by our king, the first wali of Swat.  She saw me gossiping with a 
girl in the year above and told me, Now you are with Resham and I am with Rida.  And hed been in Pakistan for more than nine years.  Little did we know that years later the same maulana s organisation would become the 
Swat Taliban.  

One night we all went for dinner at the house of my fathers friend Dr Afzal, who runs a hospital.  

My father brushed it off.  Finally they said I was 
stable.  In the summer months there would 
often be thunder and lightning crashing outside and I would crawl closer to my fathers knee.  

As the khushal School started to attract more pupils, we moved again and finally had a television.  In my country too many politicians think nothing 
of stealing.  My father often spoke of the kindness of Akbar Khan and Nasir Pacha to illustrate 
that if you help someone in need you might also receive unexpected aid.  Unfortunately the demand for English tuition turned out to be low, and there 
were unexpected drains on their income.  He read it out.  I know 
who targeted me.  

My mother and father tell each other everything so Aba soon found out why I was so sad.  My brothers loved this, and they would taunt me and my mother by pointing out the 
wreckage of vehicles on the mountainside.  She comes from a large 
family with three sisters and four brothers.  If you have a 
headache and tell the doctor you have a stomach ache, how can the doctor help? You must speak the 
truth.  Im not against you personally, I just 
want every girl to go to school.  We can sit by and hope the government will help but they wont.  We are supposed to take revenge for 
wrongs done to us, but where does that end? If a man in one family is killed or hurt by another man, 
revenge must be exacted to restore nang.  Marriage is part of life, we said.  Like my father he was very outspoken and had been threatened 
too.  The whole episode had been a matter of botched bureaucracy.  Am I in an office or am I in a 
police station or a court? Am I a criminal? He decided to challenge the officials to protect other 
school owners from such bullying and corruption.  

She laughed and said, We are all three good friends.  A group of boys from our neighbourhood used to hang round there.  Anyone reading them might think we won the three wars we have fought 
and lost against our great enemy India.  The chief minister of KPK was the first person who called.  

Anyone could see that Musharraf was doubledealing, taking American money while still helping 
the jihadis strategic assets, as the ISI calls them.  

Dr Javid had known this was coming.  He 
was hoping to build a political consensus behind launching an allout attack on the Taliban.  I wore my 
scarf over my head but never over my face.  And if it was serious why werent they operating? He felt uncomfortable in a 
military hospital.  

Swat was one of the places most affected.  I have trouble in my home too.  Musicians took out adverts in the papers saying they had stopped playing and 
were pledging to live pious lives to appease the Taliban.  

Yet she too got angry with him once.  But 
we soon found out that the Americans had gone it alone.  Suddenly there was a lot of optimism about the future.  Next to 



that was a smaller shed containing a panel with a confusion of wires sprouting from it.  It was also there that my father met his 



mentor Akbar Khan, who although he had not gone to college himself lent my father money so he 
could.  Shiza Shahid, our friend from 
Islamabad, had finished her studies in Stanford and invited twentyseven girls from the Khushal 
School to spend a few days in the capital seeing the sights and taking part in workshops to help us get 
over the trauma of living under the Taliban.  If they killed him then I 
can put the children in an orphanage.  We were lucky to live in a paradise like Swat with so many beautiful 
places to visit waterfalls, lakes, the ski resort, the walis palace, the Buddha statues, the tomb of 
Akhund of Swat.  Sufi Mohammad didnt do what he should have done.  

For a while his Muslim identity seemed more important than anything else in his life.  One of them was a maulana and my father managed to get him freed.  Instead I am in a country which is five hours 
behind my beloved homeland Pakistan and my home in the Swat Valley.  One of the few people who spoke out for Asia Bibi in Pakistan was the governor of Punjab, 
Salman Taseer.  I dont 
know why, but hearing I was being targeted did not worry me.  The odd thing was no one had even noticed the publication of the book to start 
with it wasnt actually on sale in Pakistan but then a series of articles appeared in Urdu 
newspapers by a mullah close to our intelligence service, berating the book as offensive to the 
Prophet and saying it was the duty of good Muslims to protest.  

It seemed like everyone knew I had written the BBC diary.  The whole affair left a lot of bad feeling, particularly because on 17 March, 
the day after Davis was released, a drone attack on a tribal council in North Waziristan killed about 
forty people.  
My favourite programme was Shaka Laka Boom Boom, an Indian childrens series about a boy called 
Sanju who has a magic pencil.  Just after midnight someone 
knocked at their door.  Fazlullah hated the Bollywood movies we so 
loved, which he denounced as unIslamic.  I did not like going barefoot.  I saw tears in my parents eyes.  I couldnt 
think straight.  

My father tried to change his mind.  Be natural, Irfan told me.  My father was worried.  There 
was no hospital.  

The people in Sewoor were Gujars, Kohistanis and Mians.  We must all work together for 
the rights of girls, I said.  My mother had already offered her 
bangles to pay for my fathers nephew to go to college, which my father had rashly promised to fund 
fortunately, my fathers cousin Jehan Sher Khan had stepped in and she did not realise the bangles 
were only partly paid for.  Some boundaries cannot be crossed.  My fathers heart sank.  We saw an official from the United Nations say on television that it was the worst logistical 
nightmare that the UN had ever faced.  My father would make him good tea and offer him biscuits in the hope that would 
keep him satisfied.  Our 
biggest intelligence service belongs to the military and is called the ISI.  I have informed my family and they are very unhappy.  Most of the shops had 
heavy metal shutters; those that didnt had been looted.  

When we got the topic, I couldnt believe my eyes.  Moniba had the most beautiful 
writing and presentation of the three of us, but I always told her she did not trust herself enough.  
Sahib, he told him, I have a cousin who is ten years older than me and you have certified him ten 
years younger.  They were all very enthusiastic as each one was hoping to be made the 
amir of their district so they could be in charge of imposing shariat.  He tried desperately not to think about the treacherous consonants lying 
ahead of him, just waiting to trip him up and stick in his throat, but when he spoke, the words came 
out fluently like beautiful butterflies taking flight.  In the autumn chill winds would 
come.  With my birthday came the news 
that the Taliban had killed the owner of the Swat Continental Hotel, who was on a peace committee.  

Next Fazlullah began holding a shura, a kind of local court.  They can stop us going to school 
but they cant stop us learning, I said.  He was told there was a problem arranging their 
passports and that for security reasons he should not even tell the rest of my family he was going.  


It was school that kept me going in those dark days.  They would stop us but seemed unaware of each others 
presence.  But the girls of Swat are not afraid of anyone.  

Benazir had been in exile since I was two years old, but I had heard so much about her from my 
father and was very excited that she would return and we might have a woman leader once more.  I had 
been put into an induced coma, my vital signs were deteriorating, my face and body were swollen and 
my kidneys and lungs failing.  The brothers 
were famed for their fiery sermons and attracted thousands of worshippers, particularly after 9/11.  My father was astonished and pleased 
 in our country few doctors bother explaining anything to an illiterate woman.  It was a decision that would save my life.  
Thats why they volunteered their young men.  My mother put it best.  He was the nephew of my fathers friend Zahid Khan, the hotel 
owner who had been attacked in 2009.  

I cant say that was the worst day.  
Its hard for girls in our society to be anything other than teachers or doctors if they can work at all.  We had played together as children and later he told me he was in love with me.  I was in my cousins car, and as we drove 
through a river where the road had been washed away we had to stop at a Taliban checkpoint.  His skin looked paperthin.  When she paraded on an opentop bus through the streets, hundreds of 
thousands of people flocked to see her.  Then he climbed up so he could catch hold of the star of 
Jupiter as a symbol of his power.  Pakistan took its place.  But the gunfire kept us awake most nights.  When my father asked why, he explained it was his villages turn to work on 
Fazlullahs buildings.  Once some foreign archaeologists 
arrived to do some work there and told us that in times gone by it was a place of pilgrimage, full of 
beautiful temples domed with gold where Buddhist kings lay buried.  In the 
yard I hugged all my friends.  One girl even printed it out and brought it in to 
show my father.  She took the pink phone that Aba bought me.  To get him 
released she walked forty miles alone over mountains to appeal to a powerful cousin.  T bought it in the bazaar, she said.  I didnt agree.  They thought it was toxic, especially at 
times like this.  Roads, bridges, water and power had all 
gone.  Fazlullah could now carry out his threats and mobilise support 
for his Taliban in the name of Lai Masjid.  First the earthquake, then 
the Taliban, then the military operation and now, just as we were starting to rebuild, devastating 
floods arrived to wash all our work away.  After some time they went to visit 
some tribes in Swat to win their support so they could return to Afghanistan.  He died on 
the spot and nine other people were injured.  She was 
just sixteen, one year older than me.  The boys learn the Quran by heart, rocking 
back and forth as they recite.  

Jinnah had lived in London as a young man and trained as a barrister.  So strong was the force of the water that even concrete buildings had been 



reduced to rubble.  Hed 
boast, Ziauddin is a shaheen  a falcon because this is a creature that flies high above other birds.  It was the worst flood in living memory.  They 
are very conservative and most of our madrasas are Deobandi.  My father is so 
charismatic that Hidayatullah says he is the kind of person who, if invited to your house, will make 
friends with your friends.  They dont have the 
power.  We had recently got some 
pets three white chickens and a white rabbit that one of Khushals friends had given him and which 
we let wander around the house.  Baitullah denied responsibility, which was unusual for the Taliban.  
After, when they get power, they behave like the criminals they once hunted down 

Fazlullahs broadcasts were often aimed at women.  Then they said he was badly 
injured and that they had his spokesman, Muslim Khan, in custody.  My father would say to her, Pekai, purdah is not only in the veil, purdah is in the heart.  Dr Javid, who is an emergency care consultant at 
Queen Elizabeth Hospital, agreed, but asked to take Dr Fiona as she is from Birmingham Childrens 
Hospital and a specialist in childrens intensive care.  Sometimes I sat on the roof too, watching the smoke rise from 
the cooking fires all around and listening to the nightly racket of the crickets.  The words came out wrong.  
They occupied all government and private buildings which they thought were of strategic importance.  
Once there, all they do is keep the children quiet with a long stick as they cannot imagine education 
will be any use to them.  

General Musharraf called it a test of the nation and announced that the army had set up Operation 
Lifeline our army likes giving their operations names.  

Colonel Junaid explained that a bone had fractured and splinters had gone into my brain, creating a 
shock and causing it to swell.  As a guest, he was treated 
exceptionally well.  She begged him to give some cooked rice to the poor, as we believe that if you give 
rice, even ants and birds will eat the bits that drop to the floor and will pray for us.  I wanted to start an education foundation.  I was presented with a cheque for half a million rupees, about $4,500, for my campaign 
for girls rights.  My mother began to pray.  He had no idea how.  
But all this time the mufti was watching.  Foreigners call them 
suicide bridges but we loved them.  Show us how you did it! we all clamoured, but he wouldnt.  Some people say I will never return home but I believe firmly in 
my heart that I will.  
Their children are usually dirty and they are looked down upon by Pashtuns, even if they are poor 
themselves.  He raged against the Lai Masjid attack and vowed to avenge the death of Abdul Rashid.  The school was doing well, and my father was building an 
impressive reception with an arched entrance in the boys high school.  
Anyone who moves or laughs is out.  I was only eleven years old but I 
felt as though I had lost everything.  Even though he was not a khan or a 
rich man, people listened to him.  Back then, they said, the mountains were all still covered in trees, there were 
schools every five kilometres and the wali sahib would visit them in person to resolve problems.  Everyone was excited because they hoped Sufi Mohammad would 
proclaim peace and victory and ask the Taliban to lay down their arms.  We cant 
afford all this entertaining! Naeem would complain.  

Naeem and my father invested their entire savings of 60,000 rupees.  We want to be free to go to school or to go to work.  Two hours ago, came the reply.  Our people traditionally fire rifles in celebration of births and weddings but 
even that had stopped during the conflict.  

When Colonel Junaid came to check on me, my father again asked him, Will she survive? 

Do you believe in God? the doctor asked him.  Our own intelligence service, ISI, had virtually 
created the Taliban.  

I sat on the rocks and thought about the fact that across the water were lands where women were 
free.  

When I overheard my father talking about this, I said, Why not me? I wanted people to know what 
was happening.  I was 
relieved that the Pakistan Studies exam had gone well so I agreed.  



In 2002 Musharraf held elections for controlled democracy.  We should learn everything and then choose which path to 
follow.  

At school my classmates were terrified.  I even promised Allah that if I could 
grow just a tiny bit taller I would offer a hundred raakat nafl, extra voluntary prayers on top of the 
five daily ones.  

I had decided very early I would not be like that.  

While we were looking around we heard someone banging on the door downstairs.  My father did not get 
home till late that evening as he had been busy checking all the other school buildings.  

I could tell my father was in a bad mood.  There are still many pictures of 
him around.  We stayed there for a week and to my joy I 



heard Moniba was also in Abbottabad, as was one of our teachers and another friend.  Eid happens twice a year Eid ulFitr or Small Eid marks 
the end of the Ramadan fasting month, and Eid ulAzha or Big Eid commemorates the Prophet 
Abrahams readiness to sacrifice his son Ismail to God.  Malala, Malala.  They also said it wasnt up to us to sort 
out the problem.  

As my father had found with Naeem, it is not easy to mix business and friendship.  
The nurse took him into a room.  Suddenly there was the crack of gunfire and an 
explosion as a suicide bomber blew himself up by the side of her vehicle.  The Taliban agreed to a tenday truce and, as a peace gesture, released a Chinese telephone 
engineer who they had kidnapped six months before.  

We lived in the shadow of the Hindu Kush mountains, where the men went to shoot ibex and golden 
cockerels.  It could 
have been you.  

At school people started talking about the diary.  This is a very 
special verse and we believe that if you say it three times at night your home will be safe from 
shayatin or devils.  Unfortunately, the maliks make little difference. 3 million and Davis was quickly spirited out of court 
and out of the country.  We needed to visit the mausoleum of 
our founder and great leader Mohammad Ali Jinnah.  One hot day she had fetched water for her fellow workers but some of 
them refused to drink it, saying that the water was unclean because she was a Christian.  Now you just need to catch 
Fazlullah.  In some places, 
when the helicopters flew in the locals all rushed underneath them, which meant they could not drop 
supplies safely.  As soon as we heard the 
broadcast on the radio, we set off.  Our weddings go on for several days of feasting.  In my speech I told the audience 
that until I had watched the English play I had no idea there were so many talented people in Pakistan.  

Its the same with stealing.  

My father was anxious to check on the school.  I always knew my mother was a strong woman but I 
looked at her with new respect.  They were friends from the village.  Instead the only people knocking on our doors are beggars! This is a Herculean task, he added.  In our society if someone dies, you feel very honoured if 
one dignitary comes to your home.  

My brothers immediately rushed off to check on their pet chickens.  

Why dont you come and live with us? asked Nasir Pacha.  We went with my fathers friend Fazal Maula and his 
daughter.  My father used to grumble, Were a school not a poultry farm.  But she never banned me from doing anything.  In the same way, if 
you choose a good method to do something bad its still bad.  

We had moved again we would move seven times by the time I was thirteen and were living in 
an apartment building.  Swat became part of Pakistan 
in 1969, the year my father was born.  The teachers told us 
examiners first looked at how much we had written, then presentation.  It wasnt the best of days to start 
with as it was the middle of school exams, though as a bookish girl I didnt mind them as much as 
some of my classmates.  The man told him the shopkeeper had 
given him a photocopied letter.  

But they did not drive the Taliban away.  

My father suspected this would not be the end of the matter.  

He had however neglected to tell his partner.  

On the day only eight or nine boys and girls turned up.  The temples are 
long gone, but almost anywhere you go in Swat, amid all the primroses and other wild flowers, you 
find their remains.  His only hope was his brotherinlaw in Karachi.  This was perhaps because the military 
had been so attached to the mosque. m when they 
saw me for the last time in Pakistan.  When we learned she was dead, my heart said to me, Why don t you go there and fight for 
women s rights? We were looking forward to democracy and now people asked, If Benazir can die, 
nobody is safe.  As a boy 
in Karachi he would study by the glow of street lights because there was no light at home.  One Talib could 
intimidate a whole village.  But some of the 



family thought people would gossip about us and say we were not properly following Pashtunwali.  Three local men, Mukhtar Khan Yousafzai, 
Khurshid Kakajee and Zahid Khan went from /my ra to hujra persuading elders to join together.  

The diary of Gul Makai received attention further afield.  

Colonel Junaid and the hospital director were not pleased to see them.  Other people said Davis was really spying on our nuclear weapons.  They knew he would have something interesting to say at workshops 
and seminars and wasnt afraid to criticise the authorities, even the army, which was now running our 
country.  Instead he just called himself 
Ziauddin Yousafzai, our clan name.  Instead they were 
alarmed to be taken to CMH, the Combined Military Hospital. m or you will be next On 
some of the nights of the killings there would also be earthquakes, which made people even more 
scared as we connect every natural disaster with a human disaster.  His legs 
and arms had all been broken.  

On the last day of February 2008 I was in the kitchen when we heard an enormous blast.  

I slept in the long room at the front of our house, and the only furniture was a bed and a cabinet 
which I had bought with some of the money I had been given as an award for campaigning for peace 
in our valley and the right for girls to go to school.  But every day she would leave behind her girl cousins playing at home and she envied them 
There seemed no point in going to school just to end up cooking, cleaning and bringing up children, so 
one day she sold her books for nine annas, spent the money on boiled sweets and never went back.  They had been sent by General Kayani after the British doctors had reported 
back to him that if I was left in Peshawar I would suffer brain damage or might even die because of 
the quality of the care and the high risk of infection.  The first words I spelt out were father and country.  That was the start of what my father calls the 
Arabisation of Pakistan.  Sometimes 
he would say, Men, go outside now.  As we headed south the 
land became more parched.  
She became a messenger for my parents, not only a doctor.  One day he would go to the primary school first, 
another day to the girls school, the next day to the boys school.  To cure a disease before 
its onset is not in accordance with sharia law, said Fazlullah on the radio.  

The threats began to come closer to home.  
We used to hold competitions for who would collect the most toffees.  It was as if there 
was a feud between two brothers and they agreed to live in different houses.  He taught theology in the government high school in 
the village of Shahpur.  We had enjoyed a glimpse of a different life in Islamabad.  He was a scary man with dark panda shadows around his eyes, large teeth that seemed to 
stand to attention and hair pomaded flat on his head.  My father was almost bursting with pride at how I came across on the 
documentary.  He was at an important gathering of about 400 principals who had come 
from all over Swat to protest against plans by the government to impose a central regulatory authority.  Not 
everyone wanted to as they said the children were dirty and probably diseased, and their parents 
would not like them going to school with children like that.  But the image of America in Pakistan had become of one of drones, secret 
raids on our territory and Raymond Davis.  Instead they advanced to the east and on 16 November 
captured Alpuri, the main town of Shangla.  We wont give him the building but be careful.  In my fathers small village eight people had been killed and 
many homes destroyed.  Even if I have to 
live in the deserts of the Sahara, I need her eyes open; I wont be able to live without her.  I didnt get 
a chance to answer their question, Who is Malala? or I would have explained to them why they 
should let us girls go to school as well as their own sisters and daughters.  On top 
of some of the peaks were ruins where vultures circled, the remains of forts built by the first wali.  You were the one who said if we believe in something greater 
than our lives, then our voices will only multiply even if we are dead.  The 
government promised they would all be looked after by the state, but that felt as empty as most 
government promises.  I am inspired by Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the man who some call the Frontier Gandhi, 
who introduced a non violent philosophy to our culture.  Its very hard on them.  On the road we 
passed dusty faced children bent double with huge bundles of grass on their backs and men leading 



flocks of shaggy goats that wandered hither and thither.  So many journalists thronged to the school that day that it turned 
into a news studio.  The army was everywhere.  

As the day went on and the sun climbed higher in the sky, more and more of the White Mountain 
would be bathed in golden sun.  My father said we common people were like chaff caught 
between the two stones of a water mill.  As a teacher he was 
eligible for a discount on his sons school fees for sports and joining the Boy Scouts.  

My father tried not to think about the past and whether he had been wrong to encourage me to speak 
out and campaign.  I knew these 
were very small steps.  We heard there were thousands of missing all over Pakistan.  Afterwards he said that had he known Jinnah was dying he would have delayed and 
there would have been no Pakistan.  He told them they would have their reward in the hereafter.  One version was that they tried to persuade Asia Bibi to convert to Islam.  We tend to remember years by events, like an 
earthquake.  The peace deal was merely 
a mirage.  All sorts of questions flew through my waking brain: Where was I? Who had brought me 
there? Where were my parents? Was my father alive? I was terrified.  They glimpsed enough of each other to 
know they liked one another, but for us it is taboo to express such things.  Like all our dictators, he started by addressing the nation 
on TY, beginning, Mere aziz hamwatano  My dear countrymen then went into a long tirade 
against Sharif, saying that under him Pakistan had lost our honour, dignity and respect.  It was late afternoon 
by the time we reached Mardan, which is a hot and busy city.  My brave daughter, my beautiful daughter, she cried.  His body was found dumped in his familys ancestral graveyard.  You are playing havoc with our lives and our 
culture.  I stood on our roof looking at the mountains, 
the snowtopped Mount Elum where Alexander the Great had reached up and touched Jupiter.  It wasnt a good way to leave things.  My father laughed and said I should go into politics.  They are saying they will destroy the mountain but they cant even control the road.  
Some girls were singing, I was drumming rhythms with my fingers on the seat.  

On 12 November Musharraf ordered 10,000 more troops into our valley with additional helicopter 
gunships.  

Their radio coverage spread across the valley and neighbouring districts.  


I woke up on 16 October, a week after the shooting.  My cousin quickly gave us his music cassettes to hide in our purses.  Moniba spoke well she was very 
composed and her speech was more emotional and poetic than mine, though mine might have had the 
better message.  I was thousands of miles away from home with a 
tube in my neck to help me breathe and unable to speak.  Not because of girls like me and my school but because our 
country has more than 200 nuclear warheads and they were worried about who was going to control 
them.  The Taliban bombed the power station so we had no 
electricity, then a few days later they blasted the pipeline so we had no gas either.  He made us all laugh with 
his crazy stories.  Everyone knew these men belonged to LeT, and soon their 
black and white banners with crossed swords were flying everywhere in the mountains and valleys.  

On top of that, there was a stream of guests from Shangla now that my father had a place for them to 
stay.  People in 
Buner had always resisted the Taliban but they were ordered by the local authorities not to fight.  Our home was always full of people 
visiting from the village.  

They know no one will ask the manager, said my father.  Even though my father 
was not an elder or a khan, he was chosen as spokesperson as he was not afraid to speak out.  He was from a wealthy khan family and the local 
vice president of the ANP.  Besides, my father knew this 
could be our megaphone to the outside world.  There is a suicide bomber over there! Wed promised to meet the peace 
walker, so we went by a different route, placed a garland round his neck, then left quickly for home.  Atal had a tantrum and refused so he walked home in a huff with some of 
his friends.  But they 
are from different tribes so their love causes a war.  Moniba often brought 
food to school and would just bring one spare fork.  My mother told me 
off and apologised to the cart owner.  They were 
just waiting to be married, says my father.  The troops 
blasted holes in the wall surrounding the mosque and fired mortars at the compound as helicopter 
gunships hovered overhead.  Then many more bombings followed, almost 
every day.  Everyone believed the Taliban 
would return to Shangla so they couldnt understand why we hadnt remained in Mardan.  My father had hired three Flying 
Coaches but we could not all fit in, so five of us me, Moniba and three other girls were in the 
dyna, the school van.  

The road up the small hill is usually busy as it is a short cut but that day it was strangely quiet.  He ended it with Lincolns words: it is 
far more honourable to fail than to cheat .  My mother said it was hard for the 
poor children to learn when they were not getting enough food at home so some of the girls would 
come to our house for breakfast.  She replied that 
Christ had died on the cross for the sins of Christians and asked what the Prophet Mohammad had 
done for Muslims.  Teach him it 
is far more honourable to fail than to cheat.  

I told you last night the issue was resolved, my father replied.  None of them had ever been on a helicopter.  Fazlullah was made 
chief of the Swat sector.  The wali administered justice, kept the peace between warring tribes and collected 
ushur a tax of ten per cent of income with which he built roads, hospitals and schools.  Sometimes I would mimic the teachers.  She says he didnt even notice, as he would set off early every morning after 
a breakfast of cornbread and cream, his German pistol strapped under his arm, and spend his days 
busy with local politics or resolving feuds.  

We have a special history too.  Usually car journeys are an adventure for us children as we rarely go anywhere.  
Malala swung in that cradle, he said.  He had the chance 
to be the hero of history but didnt take it, she said.  They wanted to move me but suggested that in the 
meantime a top doctor be brought in.  But just like during the earthquake, it was mainly volunteers 
from Islamic groups who were the first to arrive in the more remote and isolated areas with aid.  They even camped on the golf course, their big guns trained on 
the hillsides.  

My mother and her friends were upset about not being able to go shopping, particularly in the days 
before the Eid holidays, when we beautify ourselves and go to the stalls lit up by fairy lights that sell 
bangles and henna.  The other girls all covered their heads before 
emerging from the door and climbing up into the back.  

Some people even claimed the video was fake.  The birds 
loved that tree.  We would sit on the 
floor around a long plastic sheet which my mother laid with food, and eat with our right hand as is our 
custom, balling together rice and meat.  What really depressed him was the looting of the destroyed schools the furniture, the 
books, the computers were all stolen by local people.  My father, Ziauddin, is different 
from most Pashtun men.  We played marbles in the yard over and over again.  In a short 
time they had taken over fiftynine villages and set up their own parallel administrations.  

The pressure from the whole country worked, and Fazlullah agreed to lift the ban for girls up to ten 
years old Year 4.  

Then Id pray.  

Unfortunately not many people were convinced.  Not only was Peshawar dangerous for Westerners but after googling 
me she realised this was no ordinary case.  My father said he had heard rumours that some Taliban were even hiding inside the camps 



and harassing the women.  Our army, which already had a lot of strange side businesses, like factories making 
cornflakes and fertilisers, had started producing soap operas.  My fathers cousin Jehan Sher Khan 
Yousafzai was one of the few who came to celebrate my birth and even gave a handsome gift of 
money.  Twice bombs went off when I was in the kitchen, 
so close by that the whole house rattled and the fan above the window fell down.  He told him that the scan in Swat had been done from only one angle, but this 
new scan showed the injury was more serious.  But by the middle of 2007 the situation was so bad that people 



began to worry the militants could take over the capital.  What are you doing? he asked.  Dont open it, 
Malala! my father ordered.  

At the start of May our army launched Operation True Path to drive the Taliban out of Swat.  First I thought of wearing a very 
beautiful dress, but then I decided to wear something more modest for the interview as I wanted 
people to focus on my message and not my clothes.  

In Pakistan we were still under a dictatorship, but America needed our help, just as it had in the 
1980s to fight the Russians in Afghanistan.  Luckily, a neighbour called Mr Amanuddin took them in 
for the night.  

When Musharraf sent troops into the FATA, starting with Waziristan in 2004, the brothers led a 
campaign declaring the military action un Islamic.  My father was 
teacher, accountant and principal.  They thought it was 
shameful for their children to mix with those from poor families.  The backlash wasnt just in Swat.  

I liked to sit on the roof and watch the mountains and dream.  It 
looked like the remains of someones dinner.  When Sufi 
Mohammad was imprisoned in a roundup of militant leaders in 2002, Fazlullah had taken over the 
movements leadership.  Strangers came to the house asking 
questions about my family.  He 
began building a vast redbrick headquarters in Imam Deri complete with a madrasa, a mosque and 
walls and levees to protect it from the Swat River.  Thousands of people were leaving with just the 
clothes they had on their backs.  We know him affectionately as Badshah Sahib, and though he was 
completely illiterate, he managed to bring peace to the valley.  

It was very emotional to see him again.  There was no way they 
could pay this so my father asked one of his political friends to use his influence.